CHAPTER V.

THE FIRST VISIT TO THE TEMPLE, AND THE EDUCATION OF
JESUS.

§ 40. JESUS, WHEN TWELVE YEAES OLD, IN THE TEMPLE.

THE Gospel of Matthew passes in silence over the entire period
from the return of the parents of Jesus out of Egypt, to the baptism
of Jesus by John; and even Luke has nothing to tell us of tlie long
interval between tlie early childhood of Jesus and his maturity,
beyond a single incident-his demeanour on a visit to tlie temple in
his twelfth year (ii. 41-52). This anecdote, out of the early youth
of Jesus is, as Hess has truly remarked,? distinguished from the
narratives hitherto considered, belonging to his childhood, by the
circumstance that Jesus no longer, a,s in the latter, holds a merely
passive position, but presents an active proof of his high destination;

a proof which has always been especially valued, as indicating the

moment in which the consciousness of that destination was kindled
in Jesus. ||

In liis twelfth year, the period at which, according to Jewish

* Ueher den Lukas, S. 49. There is a similar hesitation in Theile, Biographic Jesu,
§• 13.   •)• Ueber den Ursprung u. s. w., S. 68 f. u. S. 158.   f Comp. Animon, Fortbil-
dung, 1, S. 194 ft'.; Ue Wette, exeget. Handli., 1, 2, S. 24 f.; George, S. 84 ff. Thai
different narrators may give different explanations of the same fact, and that these dif-
ferent explanations may afterwards be united in one book, is proved by many examples
in the 0. T.   Thus in Genesis, three derivations are given of tlie name of Isaac; two
o( that of Jacob,(xxv. 26. xxvii. 16), and so of Edom and Beershcba (xxvi. 33). Coinp.
De Wrtte, Kritik der mos. Geseh.. !->. 1 10- I 18 ft' im.l mi. u.t^^,-i,,;e^^ 1 i c ca «•

192 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

usage, the boy became capable of an independent participation in
the sacred rites, the parents of Jesus, as this narrative informs us,
took him for tlie first time to the Passover. At tlie expiration of
the feast, the parents bent tlieir -vvay homewards ; that their son

•was missing gave them no immediate anxiety, because they sup-
posed him to be amon"' their travelling companions, and it was not
until after they liad accomplished a day's journey, and in vain sought
tlieir son among their kinsfolk and acquaintance, that they turned
back to Jerusalem to look for him there. Tins conduct on the part
of tlie parents of Jesus may witli reason excite surprise. It seems
inconsistent witli the carefulness which it has been thought incumb-
ent on us to attribute to them, that they should have allowed tlie
divine child entrusted to their keeping, to remain so long out of
their siglit; and hence they have on many sides been accused of
neglect and a dereliction of duty, in the instance before us.* It has
been urged, as a general consideration in vindication of Joseph and
Mary, tliat the greater freedom permitted to tlie boy is easily con-
ceivable as part of a liberal method of education ;f but even accord-
ing to our modern ideas, it would seem more than liberal for parents
to let a boy of twelve years remain out of their sight during so long
an interval as our narrative supposes ; how far less rcconcileable
must it then be with tlie more rigid views of education lield by the
ancients, not excepting the Jews ? It is remarked however, that
viewing the case as an extraordinary one, the parents of Jesus knew
their child, and they could therefore very well confide in his under-
standing and character, so far as to be in no fear that any danger

•would accrue to him from his unusual freedom ;f but we can per-
ceive from tlieir subsequent anxiety, that they were not so entirely
at ease on tliat liead. Thus tlieir conduct must be admitted to be
such as we sliould not have anticipated: but it is not consequently
incredible, nor docs it suffice to render the entire narrative improb-
able, for the parents of Jesus are no saints to us, that we should
not impute to them any fault.

Returned to Jerusalem, they find their son on tlie third day in
the temple, doubtless in one of the outer halls, in tlie midst of an
assembly of doctors, engaged in a conversation with them, and ex-
citing universal astonishment (v. 45 f.) From some indications it
would seem tliat Jesus lield a higher position in tlie presence of the
doctors, than could belong to a boy of twelve years. Tlie word
ica6ei;6fzevov (sitting) lias excited scruples, for according to Jewisli
records, it was not until after the death of the Rabbi Gamaliel, an
event long subsequent to tlie one described in our narrative, that the
pupils of the rabbins sat, they having previously been required to
stand§ when in the school; but this J cwisli tradition is of doubtful
authority. ||  It has also been thought a difficulty, tliat Jesus does

* Olshausen, ut sup. 1. 150. + Hase, Leben Jeau, § 37.  f Heydenreicli, uber die

TT-.-__-I'-__. _.i .-^ .. _ a i o A€\O    e n.r.,,.-:n..l. f m »^.,A T;™1,*<-^A* tn !«,*   II Vi;1. Knin/il.

FIRST VISIT TO THE TEMPLE.              193

not merely hear the doctors, but also asks them questions, thus ap-
pearing to assume the position of their teacher.  Such is indeed the
representation of the apocryphal Gospels, for in them Jesus, before
lie is twelve years old, perplexes all tlie doctors by his questions,*
and reveals to his instructor in tlie alphabet the mystical signiiiancc
of the characters ;f wliilc at the above visit to the temple lie proposes
controversial questions,:): such as that toucliing tlie Messiah's being
at once David's Son and Lord, (Mattli. xxii. 41) and proceeds to
throw light on all departments of knowledge.§ If the expressions
epUTav and cnroKpiveaOal implied that Jesus played tlie part of a
tcaclier in this scene, so unnatural a feature in tlie evangelical nar-
rative would render tlie whole suspicious. || But tliere is nothing to
render this interpretation of tlie words necessary, for according to
Jewish custom, rabbinical teaching was of such a kind that not only
did tlie masters interrogate the pupils, but the pupils interrogated
the masters, when they wished for explanations on any point.*!' We
may witli the more probability suppose that the writer intended to
attribute to Jesus sucli questions as suited a boy, because he, appa-
rently not without design, refers the astonishment of the doctors, not
to his questions, but to that in which lie could best show himself in
the liglit of an intelligent pupil-namely, to his answers. A more
formidable difficulty is the statement, that the boy Jesus sat m the
midst of the doctors, iv ^liw TWV 6iSaaK.d'/.uv.   For we leam from
Paul (Acts xxii. 3.) the position that became a pupil, when he says
that he was brought up at the feet (TTapa'-ov? To6a^ of Gamaliel: it
being the custom for tlie rabbins to be placed on chairs, while their
pupils sat on the ground,** and did not take their places among their
masters. It has indeed been thought that iv y,iaw might be so ex-
plained as to signify, either that Jesus sat between the doctors,
who are supposed to have been elevated on chairs, wliile Jesus
and tlie other pupils are pictured as sitting on tlie ground between
them,1-t or merely that lie was in the company of doctors, that is,
in the synagogue \\\ but according to the strict sense of the words,
the expression icaOi^eaOal, sv f.iia(f> nvGiv appears to signify, if not
as Schottgen believes, §§ in mujorem Jesu gloriam, a place of pre-
eminent honour, at least a position of equal dignity with tliat oc-
cupied by tlie rest.   It need only be asked, would it harmonize
witli the spirit of our narrative to substitute iiaO^oi-ievov Trapa rovf
•n66a<; wv StSaaitdXuv for naO. KV ^EOG) T. 6. ? the answer will cer-
tainly be in the negative, and it will then be inevitable to ad-
mit, that our narrative places Jesus in another relation to tlie doc-
tors than tliat of a learner, though the latter is the only natural
one for a boy of twelve, however highly gifted. For Olshausen's

* Evang. Thomae, c. vi. ff. Ap. Thilo, p. 288 fi'i and Evang. infant, arab. c. xlviii.
P. 123, Thilo, •)• Ibid. t Evang. intant.-arab. c, 1. § Ibid. c. 1, and li; comp, ev. Tho-
"la', c. xix,   ]| Olshausen confesses this, S. lol,  ^ For proofs (e, g, Hieros, Taanith,
lxv"' 4) see Western and LiKhtfbut, in loc,   ** Lightfoot, Horgi, p, ^Vi,   f-i- Pnulus,

194

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

position,*-that in Jesus nothing was formed from without, by the
instrumentality of another's wisdom, because this would be incon-
sistent with the character of the Messiah, as absolutely self-determin-
ed,-contradicts a dogma of the church which he himself advances,
namely, tliat Jesus in his manifestation as man, followed tlic regular
course of human development. For not only is it in the nature of
this development to be gradual, but also, and still more essentially,
to be dependent, whether it be mental or physical, on tlie inter-
change of reception and influence. To deny this in relation to tlie
physical life of Jesus-to say, for example, tliat tlie food which lie
took did not serve for tlie nourishment and growth of his body by
real assimilation, but merely furnished occasion for him to reproduce
himself from witliin, would strike every one as Docetism; and ig
the analogous proposition in relation to his spiritual development,
namely, tliat lie appropriated nothing from without, and used wliat
lie heard from others merely as a voice to evoke one truth after an-
other from tlie recesses of his own mind-is tills anything else than
a more refined Docetism ? Truly, if we attempt to form a conception
of tlie conversation of Jesus with the doctors in tlic temple according
to this theory, we make anything but a natural scene of it. It is
not to be supposed tliat he taught, nor properly speaking tliat lie
was taught, but that tlie discourse of tlie doctors merely gave an im-
petus to Ins power of teaching himself, and was tlie occasion for an
ever-brightening light to rise upon him, especially on tlie subject of
his own destination.  But in that case lie would certainly have
given utterance to his newly acquired knowledge; so tliat tlie posi-
tion of a teacher on tlie part of tlie boy would return upon us, a po-
sition which Olshausen himself pronounces to be preposterous. At
least such an indirect mode of teaching is involved as Ness sub-
scribes to, when he supposes that Jesus, even thus early, made tlie first
attempt to combat the prejudices which swayed in "the synagogue,
exposing to the doctors, by means of good-humoured questions and
requests for explanation, sucli as are willingly permitted to a boy,
the weakness of many of their dogmas.* But even such a position
on the part of a boy of'twelve, is inconsistent with tlie true process
of human development, through which it behoved tlie God-Man him-
self to pass. Discourse of this kind from a boy must, wo grant,
have excited the astonishment of all tlie hearers; nevertheless tlio
expression E^iaravro TrdvTe^ ol duovovree; avrov (v. 47.), looks too
much like a panegyrical formula. §

Tlie narrative proceeds to tell us how the mother of Jesus re-
proached lier son when she liad found him thus, asking him wliy lie
had not spared his parents the anguisli of their sorrowful search?

* Bilil. Comm. p. 151.  t Geschichte Jesu, S. 112. f. In the similar account also
which Josephus gives us of himself when fourteen, it is easy to discern the exaggeration
of a self-complacent man. Lite, 2 : Moreover, when I was a child, and about fourteen
years of age, 1 was commended by all for the love I had to learning, on which account the
high priests and principal men of the city came there frequently in me together, in order to

FIEST VISIT TO THE TEMPLE.

195

To this Jesus returns an answer which forms the point of the entire
narrative; he asks whether they might not have known that he was
to be sought nowhere else than in the house of his Father, in the
temple ? (v. 48 f.) One might be inclined to understand this de-
signation of God as ~ov -n-arpb^ generally, as implying that God was
the. Father of all men, and only in this sense the Fatlier of Jesus.
But flits interpretation is forbidden, not only by tlie addition of the
pronoun ^ov, the above sense requiring i\\iGiv (as in Matt. vi. 9.), but
still more absolutely by the circumstance tliat tlie parents of Jesus
did not understand these words (v. 50), a decided indication that
they must have a special meaning, which can liere be no other than
the mystery of the Messiahship of Jesus, wlio as Messiah, was
vibf Oeov in a peculiar sense. But that Jesus in his twelfth year
had already the consciousness of his Messiahship is a position which,
although it may be consistently adopted from the orthodox point of
view, and although it is not opposed to tlie regular human form of
the development of Jesus, which even orthodoxy maintains, we are
not here bound to examine. So also the natural explanation, which
retains the above narrative as a liistory, though void of the miracu-
lous, and which accordingly supposes tlie parents of Jesus, owing to
a particular combination of circumstances, to have come even before
his birtli to a conviction of his Messiahship, and to have instilled
this conviction into their son from his earliest childhood,-this too
may make it plain how Jesus could be so clear as to Ills messianic
relation to God; but it can only do so by the hypothesis of an un-
precedented coincidence of extraordinary accidents. We, on the
contrary, who have renounced the previous incidents as historical,
either in the supernatural or the natural sense, are unable to com-
prehend how the consciousness of his messianic destination could
t>e so early developed in Jesus. For though tlie consciousness of a
more subjective vocation, as that of a poet or an artist, which is
dependent solely on the internal gifts of the individual, (gifts which
cannot long remain latent,) may possibly be awakened very early;

an objective vocation, in wliicli tlie conditions of external reality are
a chief co-operator, as tlie vocation of the statesman, the general,
the reformer of religion, can hardly be so early evident to the most
highly endowed individual, because for this a knowledge of con-
temporary circumstances would be requisite, which only long obser-
vation and mature experience can confer. Of the latter kind is the
vocation of tlie Messiah, and if this is implied in the words by which
Jesus in his twelfth year justified his lingering in tlie temple, he
cannot have uttered the words at that period.

In anotlier point of view also, it is worthy of notice that the
parents of Jesus are said (v. 50) not to have understood tlie words
which lie addressed to them. What did these words signify? That
God was Ills Father, in whose house it behoved him to be.  But
that her snn ivrmir] ;r> o o,,n^;^» „„,.„„ i.» -n~J - ".!>.-1"-'" 1---1 T

196

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

35), and that he would have a peculiar relation to the temple she
miglit infer, both from the above title, and from tlie striking recep-
tion which he had met with at his first presentation in the temple,
when yet an infant. The parents of Jesus, or at least Mary, of
whom it is repeatedly noticed that she carefully kept in her heart
tlie extraordinary communications concerning her son, ought not to
liave been in the dark a single moment as to the meaning of his
language on this occasion. But even at the presentation in the
temple, we are told that the parents of Jesus marvelled at tlie dis-
course of Simeon (v. 33.), which is merely saying in other words
that they did not understand him. And their wonder is not referred
to the declaration of Simeon that their boy would be a cause not
only of the rising again, but of the fall of many in Israel, and that
a sword would pierce through the heart of his mother (an aspect of
Ins vocation and destiny on which nothing had previously been com-
municated to the parents of Jesus, and at which therefore they might
naturally wonder); for these disclosures are not made by Simeon
until after the wonder of the parents, which is caused only by Si-
meon's expressions of joy at the sight of tlie Saviour, who would
be the glory of Israel, and a liglit even to the Gentiles. And liere
again there is no intimation that the wonder was excited by tlie idea
that Jesus would bear this relation to tlie heathens, which indeed it
could not well be, since this more extended destination of the Mes-
siah had been predicted in the Old Testament. There remains there-
fore as a reason for tlie wonder in question, merely tlie fact of tlie
child's Messiahship, declared by Simeon; a fact which had been long
ago announced to them by angels, and which was acknowledged by
Mary in her song of praise. We have just a parallel difficulty in
the present case, it being as inconceivable that the parents of Jesus
sliould not understand his allusion to his messianic character, as
that they should wonder at tlie declaration of it by Simeon. We
must therefore draw this conclusion : if the parents of Jesus did not
understand these expressions of their son when twelve years old,
those earlier communications cannot have happened; or, if the
earlier communications really occurred, tlie subsequent expressions
of Jesus cannot have remained incomprehensible to them. Having
done away with those earlier incidents as liistorical, we might con-
tent ourselves with this later want of comprehension, were it not
fair to mistrust tlie whole of a narrative whose later portions agree
so ill with the preceding. For it is the character not of an historical
record, but of a marvellous legend, to represent its personages as so
permanently in a state of wonder, that they not only at tlie first
appearance of the extraordinary, but even at tlie second, third,
tenth repetition, when one would expect them to be familiarized with
it, continually are astonished and do not understand-obviously
with the view of exalting tlie more highly the divine impartation
1-iv tins laa+incr incnmiTrp.hensibleness. So. to draw an example from

FIKST VISIT TO THE TEMPLE.

197

death is set forth in all its loftiness in the evangelical narratives by
tlie circumstance, that even tlie repeated, explicit disclosures of Je-
sus on this subject, remain throughout incomprehensible to tlie dis-
ciples ; as here tlie mystery of tlie Messiahship of Jesus is exalted
by the circumstance, tliat his parents, often as it has been an-
nounced to them, at every fresh word on the subject are astonished
anew and do not understand.

Tlie twofold form of conclusion, that tlie mother of Jesus kept
all tlicsc sayings in her heart (v. 51), and that the boy grew in wis-
dom and stature, and so forth, we have already recognised as a
favourite form of conclusion and transition in tlie heroic legend of
the Hebrews; in particular, tliat which relates to the growth of the
boy is almost verbally parallel with a passage relating to Samuel,
as in two former instances similar expressions appeared to have
been borrowed from tlie history of Samson.*

§. 41. THIS NAKEATIVE ALSO MYTHICAL.

THUS here again we must acknowledge the influence of the le-
gend ; but as tlie main part of the incident is thoroughly natural,
we might in this instance prefer tlie middle course, and after diser-
gaging tlie mythical, seek to preserve a residue of history. We
might suppose tliat tlie parents of Jesus really took their son to Je-
rusalem in liis early youth, and tliat after having lost siglit of him,
(probably before their departure,) they found him in the temple where,
eager for instruction, lie sat at tlie feet of tlie rabbins. When cal-
led to account, lie declared tliat liis favourite abode was in tlie liouse
of God ;f a sentiment which rejoiced liis parents, and won tlie ap-
probation of tlie bystanders.  The rest of tlie story we miglit sup-
pose to have been added by tlie aggrandizing legend, after Jesus was
acknowledged as tlie Messiah. Here all tlie difficulties in our nar-
rative,-tlie idea of tlie boy sittma- in tlie midst of the doctors, his

'                                                            i/o                                                                                   '

claiming God as liis father in a special sense, and tlie departure of
tlie parents witliout their sou, would be rejected; but tlie journey
of Jesus when twelve years old, tlie eagerness for knowledge then
manifested by him, and liis attachement to the temple, are retained.
To tlicse particulars there is nothing to object negatively, for they
contain nothing improbable in itself; but their liistorical truth must
become doubtful if we can slicw, positively, a strong interest of tlie
legend, out of which tlie entire narrative, and especially tlicse in-
trinsifcally not improbable particulars, miglit have arisen.

That in the case of great men wlio in their riper ap'o liave been
distinguished by mental superiority, the very first presaging movc-

* 1 Sam. ii. 2C (LXX) :                         Luc. ii. »2:

Kat 7-0 •KtU&u.fiiov Sa^ow/A trropevero fieyalvvo-    Kat 'Irjvovf TTpocnonre ao^la nai ij7u.n'tf., ndl
ficvov, Kai uya-Sov K.O.I {IETU. Kvpiov Kal fieril   ;l;a;/)(Tt vapii tfeu Kai ui-Qpuwou;,

I'tvSpi'wuv.

Coinp:irf a)Bo whnt Josephus says Antiq. ii. ix. 6. of the ^optf vatBwfi of Moses. + Gali-

Ipr n»,,,i..t '*1,--1   T----1 n   «   r. r>.i

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

198

menta of their mind are eagerly gleaned, and if they are not to be
ascertained historically, are invented under the guidance of proba-
bility, is well known. In the Hebrew history and legend especially,
we lind manifold proofs of this tendency. Thus of Samuel it is said
in the Old Testament itself, that even as a boy he received a divine
revelation and the gift of prophecy (1 Sam. iii.), and with respect
to Moses, on whose boyish years the Old Testament narrative is
silent, a subsequent tradition, followed by Josephus and Philo, had
.striking proofs to relate of his early development. As in tlie nar-
rative before us Jesus shews himself wise beyond his years; so this
tradition attributes a like precocity to Moses;* as Jesus turning
away from tlie idle tumult of the city in all the excitement of festival
tune, finds his favourite entertainment in tlie temple among tlie
doctors ; so the boy Moses was not attracted by childish sports, but
by serious occupation, and very early it was necessary to give him
tutors, whom, however, like Jesus in his twelfth year, lie quickly

surpassed, f

According to Jcwisli custom and opinion, tlie twelftli year formed

an epoch in development to wliicli especial proofs of awakening gen-
ius were the rather attaclicd, because in tlie twelftli year, as with
us in tlie fourteenth, tlie boy was regarded as having outgrown tlie
period of childhood.:): Accordingly it was believed of Moses, that
in Ilia twelfth year lie left tlie liouse of Ills fatlicr, to become an in-
dependent organ of tlie divine rcvclatlons.§ The Old Testament
leaves it uncertain how early the gift of propliecy was imparted to
Samuel, but he was said by a later tradition to have prophesied
from liis twelfth year :|| and in like manner tlie wise judgments of
Solomon and Daniel (1 Kings iii. 23 ff. Susann. 45 ff.) were sup-
posed to have been given wlicn tlicy were only twelve.^ It in tlie
case of tlicsc Old Testament heroes, the spirit that impelled them
manifested itself according to common opinion so early as in their
twelftli year, it was argued that it could not have remained longer
concealed in Jesus; and if Samuel and David shewed themselves at

* Joseph. Ant. ii. ix. (;.  f Philo, flu vita llosis, Opp. ed. Mangey, V. 2. p. 83 f. ovX
{M.a KO^iSi/ victor ?/O£TO TuQao^oic KCU •)e'kuai Hal Trai.Sicuc-u^-V alSu nal oeyvorriTa irapa-
(jiaivuv. utTttvofUiai nal Hwfiaacv, u rf/v V"W c^e^er u^tViaeiv •npoaely.   6t6u.amf.oi S
ai9v<:, W.a.xo9sv u/iAoc, mpf/aav.-uv Iv oil jzaaptJ xpuvy Tac fmiifitif vvspt.iSu.Ai.-v, sv/zoiptf
^i'dmi; <p'i}uvuv TUC iyr/yy/OEi.i-.   ^ Cuaglga, "1'. Wrtstein, in loc.   A XIJ iinn'i films cni-
.wtn.r iiialurus.  So Joma f. Ixxxii. 1.  lierachoth f. xxiv. 1 ; whereas Bercschith Itabba
Ixii. mentions tin-. l;!th year as the critical one. § Schenioth ]!. ap. Wetstcin : Dixit K.
fi/1'iinii : Muse's iliiiidrniii-ius civilians est a domo patris sui etc.  \\ Josepll. Antiq. f. x. •t :

Sn^or»;Aof or •Km'/'-ripww £7-0; ijuij uw'ieKarov, vpOEifir/Tevc.   •[ Ignat, ep. (inlerpiil.) ad
Magnes. c. iii.:  ^o?.o,uuv 6'e-6uuriKaeTf]r jSaai'Ae'uaaf, T/IV ijiopcpuv enehiiv Ka'i fivofpuiJ-
vEin'av ivi Tail; -)'vvm;l npiow evens riiv vaiSiuv cTroiriaam. - Aimf/A 6 oofxic uuHcnacTTK
ytyovf ku-o^of ru Hsly uTti^aT-i, Ka'i rove flur-iiv rt/v TroAtuv ijicfmvrac vpsCjYcrai, ovuoipu.vrac
Kiti eTTi-9vifi]Tu(: aAAorplou KuAAovi: ttff'7/A£}'^c.  But Solomon ...... briny kini/ at the. aye,

of tin-In' ynirs, gim, Hi.nt trrriVr and pruJuund judgment between the women vith respect to
the rliildnii. . . . . J)/iiurl, the wise man, vhen twelve years old, u-iis possvssniJ by the dti-iw.

spirit, nnd cunrlctiid tlhisc ritliiiitiiiutiiiJ old men who, carrying {/ray /»ir's "t r.'ii"^ coveted
tins beauty that lirliinyKd to uaolher. Tins, it is true, is found in a Christian writing, but
on comparini; it with the above data, we are led to believe that is was drawn from a more

199

FIEST VISIT TO THE TEMPLE.

that age in their later capacity of divinely inspired seers, Solomon
in that of a wise ruler, so Jesus at the corresponding period in his
life must liave sliewn himself in tlie character to whicli he sub-
sequently established his claim, tliat namely, of the Son of God and
Teacher of Mankind. It is, in fact, the obvious aim of Luke to pass
over no epocli in the early life of Jesus, without surrounding him
with divine radiance, with significant prognostics of the future; in
this style he treats his birth, mentions the circumcision at least em-
phatically, but above all avails himself of the presentation in the
temple. There yet remained according to Jewish manners one
epoch, tlie twelfth year, -with the first journey to the passover; liovv
could he do otherwise than, following the legend, adorn this point
in tlie development of Jesus as we find that lie has done in liis nar-
rative ? and how could we do otherwise than regard his narrative as
a legendary embellishment of this period in tlie life of Jesus,* from
which we learn nothing of liis real development,! but merely some-
thing of tlie exalted notions which were entertained in tlie primitive
church of tlie early ripened mind of Jesus ?

But how tins anecdote can be numbered among mythi is found
by some altogether inconceivable. It bears, thinks Hcydcnreich,j:

a thoroughly historical character (this is tlie very point to be proved)
and tlie stamp of tlie highest simplicity (like every popular legend
in its original form); it contains no tincture of the miraculous,
wherein tlie primary characteristic of a mythus (but not of every
mythus) is lield to consist; it is so remote from all embellishment
tliat there is not tlie sliglitest detail of tlie conversation of Jesus
with tlie doctors (tlie legend was satisfied with tlie dramatic trait,
sitting in. the midst of the doctors: as a dictum, v. 49. was alone
important, and towards this the narrator liastcns without delay);

nay, even tlie conversation between Jesus and liis mother is only
given in a fragmentary aphoristic manner (there is no trace of an
omission); finally, tlie inventor of a legend would have made Jesus
speak differently to liis mother, instead of putting into liis mouth
words which might be construed into irreverence and indifference.
In tills last observation Hcydcnreich agrees wdth Schlciermacher,
who finds in the behaviour of Jesus to his mother, liable as it is to
be misinterpreted, a sure guarantee tliat the wliole history was not
invented to supply something remarkable concerning Jesus, in
connexion with tlie period at which the holy tilings of tlie temple
and tlie law were first opened to him. §

In combating tlie assertion, that an inventor would scarcely have
attributed to Jesus so much apparent harshness towards liis mother,
we need not appeal to the apocryphal Uvangelium T/iomcr, which

* This Kaiser lias seen, bill. Theol. 1, 234. •)• Neither do we learn what IIase (Le-
ben Jesu § 37) supposes to be conveyed in this narrative, namely, that as it exhibits the
same union with Goil that constituted the'idcaof the later life of Jesus, it is an intimation
that his later excellence was not the result of conversion from vouiht'ul errors, hut of the
uninterrupted development of his freedom.   + relier die Uiiziil.is^iiri.eit n a f 1 S (19

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

200

makes the boy Jesus say to his fosterfather Josepli: insipientissime
fecisti;* for even m the legend or history of tlie canonical gospels,
corresponding traits are to be found. In the narrative of the wed-
ding at Cana, we rind this rough address to Ills mother: rl Sfiol ical
aol yvvai. (John ii. 4); and in the account of the visit paid to Jesus
by his mother and brethren, the striking circumstance that he appar-
ently -wishes to take no notice of his relatives (Matt. xii. 46). If
these arc real incidents, then the legend had an historical precedent
to warrant tlic introduction of a similar feature, even into the early
youth of Jesus; if, on tlie oilier liand, they are only legends, they
are the most vivid proofs that an inducement was not wanting for
the invention of such features. Where flits inducement lay, it is
easy to see. The figure of Jesus would stand in tlie higher relief
from the obscure background of his contracted family relations, if it
were often seen that his parents were unable to comprehend hia
elevated mind, and if even he himself sometimes made them feel his
superiority-so far as this could happen without detriment to his
filial obedience, which, it should be observed, our narrative express-
ly preserves.

§ 42. ON THE EXTERNAL LIFE OF JESUS UP TO THE TIME OF HIS
PUBLIC APPEARANCE.

WHAT •wc'1'e tlie external conditions under which Jesus lived,
from the scene just considered up to the time of his public appear-
ance? On this subject our canonical Gospels give scarcely an in-
dication.

First, as to Ins place of residence, <'dl that we learn explicitly is

this: tliat both at tlic beginning and at tlie end of this obscure
period lie dwelt at Nazareth. According to Luke ii. 51.. Jesus when
twelve years old returned thither witli his parents, and according
to Matthew iii. 13. Marki. 9, he, when thirty years old (comp. Luke
iii. 23), came from thence to be baptized by Jolin. Thus our evan-
gelists appear to suppose, tliat Jesus liad in tlie interim resided in
Galileo, and, more particularly, in Nazareth.   Tills supposition,
however, does not exclude journeys, such as those to tlie feasts in

Jerusalem.

The employment of Jesus during the years of his boyliood and.

youth seems, from an intimation in our Gospels, to have been de-
termined by tlie trade of his father, wlio is there called a reti-wr
(Matt. xiii. 55.). This Greek word, used to designate the trade of
Joseph, is generally understood in the sense of faber l-ignaruis {car-
penter') ;t a few only, on mystical grounds, discover in it a faber
ferrarius (blacksmith), aurarius {goldsmith), or caementarius (ma-

* Cap. v. In the Greek text also the more probable reading is Kdi /iti?,tora oii aoijiiii;.
--t,i 'ri,:i^ ^ oy-   4. TTpnfp. the title of an Arabian apocryphal wurk (according to thu

201

EDUCATION OF JESUS.

son).* The works in wood which he executed are held of different
mao-nitudc by different authors: according to Justin and tlie JEvan-
aelium Thomce,^ t\wJ\fWQ ploughs and yokes, dpo-panai f,vya, and
in tliat case lie would be wliat we call a wheelwright: according to
tlie Evangcliuin infantice aral>icum,\ they were doors, milkves-
sels, sieves and coffers, and once Josepli makes a throne for the
kin"-; so tliat here lie is represented partly as a cabinet-maker and
partly as a cooper. Tlic Protevangeliu.m Jacobi, on tlie other liand,
makes him work at buildings, olito6opalc,Sj without doubt as a car-
penter. In tlicse labours of tlie father Jesus appears to have sliared,
according to an expression of Mark, who makes tlic Nazarencs ask
concerning Jesus, not merely as in tlie parallel passage of Matthew:

7s not this the carpenter's son? ova avrog ea-w b TOV TKK.TOVO^ vlog ;

but Is not this the carpenter ? OVK av-og KUTIV o TEICTUV ; (vi. 3.) It
is true tliat in replying to the taunt of Cclsus that tlie teacher of
the Christians was a carpenter by trade, TEIC-W -qv rffv TE^VTJV, Ori-
gen says, he must have forgotten that in none of the Gospels re-
ceived by the churches is Jesus himself called a carpenter, STI, ov6a-
fzov ~w KV rdl(; KK.K.Xr]C!iaig <j)Epofisvuv evayyeAiuv TEKTUV avrog 6 'Ir]-
aovc; avayiypa-ai,. || Tlie above passage in Mark has in fact tlie
various reading, 6 TOV TK/C-OI-'OC vl6c; ; w'hich Origcn must have taken,
unless lie be supposed altogether to have overlooked tlic passage,
and wliicli is preferred by some modern critics.^ But here Beza lias
justly remarked tliat fortasse, mutuvit aliquis, existzmans, hanc
arteni C'hristi majestati parum convemre; wdiercas there could
hardly be an interest which would render tlie contrary alteration de-
sirable.** Moreover Fathers of tlie Church and apocryphal writings
represent Jesus, in accordance witli tlie more generally accepted read-
ing, as following tlie trade of his father.  Justin attaches especial
importance to tlie fact tliat Jesus made ploughs and yokes or scales,
as symbols of active life and ofjustice.ff In tlic Jiuangellum in-
fantzcs ^traoicum, Jesus goes about with Josepli to tlie places
where tlie latter lias work, to lielp him in such a manner tliat if Jo-
seph made anything too long or too short, Jesus, by a touch or by
merely stretching out Ills liand, gave to tlic object its rig-lit size ; an
assistance which was very useful to Ins foster-father, because, as the
apocryphal text naively remarks: nee admodum peritus erat a.rtis
fabrilis.yi.

Apart from tlic apocryphal descriptions, there are many reasons
for believing tliat the above intimation as to tlie youthful employ-
ment of Jesus is correct. In tlie first place, it accords witli the

• Via. Tliilo, Cod. Apoer. N. T. p. 3G8 f. not.  •)• Justin. Dial c. Tryph. P8. Accor-
ding to liini .k'sus main's these implements, doubtless under the direction of Joseph.  In
tlie Evitng. Tlwmie c. xiii. Joseph is tlie workman.   % Cap. xxxviii. ap. Thiio, p. 112 ff.
§ C. ix. and xiii.   |] C. Cels. vi. 3<i.   «! Fritzsche, in Marc. p. 200.  ** Vid. Wetstein
and 1'aiilus, in loc.; Wmer, Healworterlluch, 1, S. U(l.'». Note; Neander, L. J. Chr. S.
4<) f. Note.   ft Ut sup.: ravra yap ru TTEKrm'iKu ^pya £'ip'/a^£ro EV uv-Qpunoil; (^v, upoTpa
Kai Cv)'?c 6t,ti TOVTUV na.1 TU Ti)(; t^inaLoavvf^ avu3o?.a ^i^aatiw. nal Kvep^'ij ^iov.   ^ Cap.

THE LIFE ffiP JESUS.

204

ing sufferers (Mark x. 5.), 'but even the pharisaic apxuv Nicodemua
(John iii. 2.) did not refuse him this title. We cannot however con-
clude from hence that Jesus had received the scholastic instruction
of a rabbin ;* for the salutation Rabbi, as also tlie privilege of read-
ing in the synagogue (Luke iv. 16 ff.), a particular which lias like-
wise been appealed to, belonged not only to graduated rabbins, but
to every teacher who liad given actual proof of Ills qualifications.f
The enemies of Jesus explicitly assert, and lie does not contradict
them, tliat lie had never learned letters : TW<- ov-oq ypa.iii.ia-a ol6e pri
y,ewO'i]K.u(;; (John vii. 15.) and the Nazarenes are astonished to find
so much wisdom in him, wlience we infer tliat lie had not to tlieir
knowledge been a student. These facts cannot be neutralized by
the discourse of Jesus in wliicli lie represents himself as tlic model
of a scribe well-instructed unto the kingdom of heaven \ (Matt. xiii.
52.) for tlic word ypa^arEvf; here means a doctor of the law in gen-
eral, and not directly a doctor qualified in tlic scliools. Lastly, the
intimate acquaintance witli tlic doctrinal traditions, and tlic abuses
of tlie rabbins, which Jesus exhibits,§ especially in tlie sermon on
the mount and the anti-pharisaic discourse Matt. xxiii., lie might
acquire from tlie numerous discourses of tlie Pharisees to tlie people,
witliout going through a course of study under them. Thus the
data on our present subject to be found in the Gospels, collectively
yield tlic result that Jesus did not pass formally through a rabbin-
ical school; on tlie other hand, the consideration that it must have
been tlie interest of the Christian legend to represent Jesus as in-
dependent of human teachers, may induce a doubt witli respect to
these statements in the New Testament, and a conjecture tliat Jesus
may not have been so entirely a stranger to tlie learned culture of
his nation. But from tlie absence of authentic information we can

arrive at no decision on this point.

Various hypotheses, more or less independent of tlie intimations
given in tlie Kcw Testament, have been advanced both in ancient
and modern times concerning tlic intellectual development of Jesus:

they may be divided into two principal classes, according to tlieir
agreement with tlie natural or tlie supernatural view. Tlie super-
natural view of tlie person, of Jesus requires that lie should be the
only one of his kind, independent of all external, liuman influences,
self-taught or rather taught of God; hence, not only must its advo-
cates dctcnninedly reject every supposition implying tliat he bor-
rowed or learned anything, and consequently place in the most glar-
ing liglit tlic difficulties v/hich lay in the way of tlie natural devel-
opment of Jesus ;|| but, t'.ie more surely to exclude every kind of
reception, they must also Lc disposed to assign as early an appear-
ance as possible to that spontaneity which we find in Jesus in his

* Such, however, are the arguments of Panlus, at. sup. 275 ff. •}• Comp. Base, Le-
ben Jcsu, | 3a ;   Kaander, 1.. J. Chr. S. 4.') f.   f Paulus, ut sup.   <i To this Schiittgen
niin(-;ila /' fi flails rahbiiturum sumnius, ill his horae, ii. p. 890 f.  |1 As e.g. Itrinhard does,

EDUCATION OF JESUS.                205

mature age. This spontaneous activity is twofold; it is theoretical
and practical. As regards tlie theoretical side, comprising judgment
and knowledge, tlie effort to give as early a date as possible to its
manifestation in Jesus, displays itself in the apocryphal passages
which have been already partly cited, and which describe Jesus as
surpassing his teachers long before his twelfth year, for according to
one of them he spoke in his cradle and declared himself to be the
Son of God.* Tlie practical side, too, of that superior order of
spontaneity attributed to Jesus in his later years, namely, tlie power
of working miracles, is attached by the apocryphal gospels to his
earliest cliildliood and youth. The JEvangelium T/wmce opens with
the fifth year of Jesus the story of his miracles,! and the Arabian
.Evangelmrn Infantice fills tlie journey into Egyyt with miracles
•which tlie mother of Jesus performed by means of the swaddling
bands of her infant, and tlie water in which lie was washed, f Some
of the miracles which according to these apocryphal gospels were
wrought by Jesus when in his infancy and boyhood, are analogous
to those in the JNTew Testament-cures and resuscitations of the
dead; others are totally diverse from tlie ruling type in tlie canon-
ical Gospels-extremely revolting retributive miracles, by which
every one who opposes the boy Jesus in any matter whatever is
smitten with lameness, or even witli death, or else mere extrava-
gancies, such as tlie giving of life to sparrows formed out of mud.}.

Tlie natural view of tlie person of Jesus had an opposite inter-
est, which was also very early manifested botli among Jewish and
heathen opponents of Christianity, and wliicli consisted in explain-
ing hiu appearance conformably to tlie laws of causality, by compar-
ing it with prior and contemporaneous facts to which it liad a rela-
tion, and thus exhibiting tlic conditions on which Jesus depended,
and the sources from which he drew.   It is true that in tlie first
centuries of tlie Christian era, the whole region of spirituality being
a supernatural one for heathens as well as Jews, tlie reproach tliat
Jesus owed his wisdom and seemingly miraculous powers, not to
himself or to God, but to a communication from without, could not
usually take tlie form of an assertion tliat he liad acquired natural
skill and wisdom in tlie ordinary way of instruction from others.§
Instead of the natural and the liuman, tlie unnatural and the demo-
niacal were opposed to tlie divine and tlie supernatural (comp. Matt.
xn. 24.), and Jesus was accused of working his miracles by the aid
of magic acquired in his youth. This charge was the most easily
attaclied to tlie journey of his parents witli him into Egypt, that
native land of magic and secret wisdom, and thus we find it both
in Celsus and in the Talmud. Tlie former makes a Jew allege

* Evang. infant, arab. c. i. p. GO f. ap. Thilo, and the passages quoted ^ 40. out of
the same Gospel, and the Evang Thomae.   •j- Cap. ii. p. 278 Thilo.   } Cap. x. ff. | E.
g. Evang. Thomas, c. iii.-v. Evimg. infant, arah. c. xlvi. f. Evang. Thoma;, c. ii.
Evang. inf. arab. c. xxxvi. || Yet some isolated instances occur, vid. Semler, Bauingar-

206 THE LIFE OF JESCS.

against Jesus, amongst other things, that he had entered into ser-
vice for wages in Egypt, that lie had there possessed himself of some
magic arts, and on the strength of tliese had on his return vaunted
himself for a God.* The Talmud gives him a member of tlie Je-
wish Sanhedrim as a teacher, makes him journey to Egypt with
tills companion, and bring magic charms from thence into Pa-
lestine.f

The purely natural explanation of tlie intellectual development
of Jesus could only become prevalent amid the enlightened culture
of modern times. In working out this explanation, tlie chief points
of difference are the following: either tlie character of Jesus is re-
garded in too circumscribed a. viev/, as tlie result of only one among
tlie means of culture which Ills times afforded, or more comprehen-
sively, as tlie result of all tliese combined; again, in tracing tills
external influence, either the internal gifts and self-determination
of Jesus arc adequately considered, or they are not.

In any case, the basis of tlie intellectual development of Jesus
was furnished by tlie sacred writings of his people, of which the
discourses preserved to us in the Gospels attest Ills zealous and pro-
found study.  His Messianic ideas seem to have been formed chiefly
on Isaiali and Daniel: spiritual religiousness and elevation above
the prejudices of Jewish nationality were impressively shadowed
forth in tlie prophetic writings senerally, together with tlie Psalms.

Next among tlie influences affecting mental cultivation in the
native country of Jesus, must be reckoned tlie three sects under
which tlie spiritual life of his fellow-countrymen may be classified.
Among tliese, the Pharisees, whom Jesus at a later period so stren-
uously combated, can apparently have liad only a negative influence
over him ; yet along with their fondness for tradition and legal pe-
dantry, their sanctimoniousness and hypocrisy, by wliicli Jesus was
repelled from tliem, we must remember their belief in angels and in
immortality, and their constant admission of a progressive develop-
ment of tlie Jewisli religion after Moses, wliicli were so many points
of union between them and Jesus.  Still as tliese tenets were only
peculiar to tlie Pharisees, in contradistinction to tlie Sadducecs, and,
for the rest, were common to all orthodox Jews, we abide by tlie
opinion that the influence of tlie Pharisaic sect on the development
of Jesus was essentially negative.

In tlie discourses of Jesus Sadduceeism is less controverted, nay,
he agrees with it in rejecting the Pharisaic traditions and hypocrisy;

* Orig. c. Cris. I. 28 : ndl (Ae'yci) on oiroc (o 'Ir/dorc) ola Trei'iav elf; AlyvJrrov /";•-
i3apl'7/(7ac, Kami 6vvufi£uv 1'i.vuv 7r£;pa^e^ e(^ at-^ Ai^i'Trnoi ae^ivvvovrai, i7ruv7/Ai}£v, iv
rait; SvvuuEdL usya d)povuv^ Kal 61 avTuac ^sbv avrbv uvfj~yop£va€.  ^ Sanhidr. f. evil. 2:-
R. Josua f. Pefuchju et '\'^ Alerandiium Aer/ypti profr^ti sunf - - ^^ ex il'.o iempwe

mnglam exernfif^ ef I-frn'lltns ad pfssimfl qUfKczs pi-rdti.rif. (An important anachronism,
as this Josua Ben Perachja lived about a century earlier.  See Jost. deschiclite dkr Isr.,
3, S. 80 ft', and 1+2 of the Appendices.) Sehabiiath f. civ. 2: Truditiii est, R. Klle.serem
dhiysc, cid firon dodos : annon J'. ^atdne (i. e. Jesus} mafJiizm ex Ai'tpJpto cuUuxit per in-
ci.tioncm in ca-rne fsucf, f'actam? vid. Schuttgen, hora1, ii. p. (il)7 ff. Eiseiitiicnyer, entdecktes

EDUCATION OF JESUS.                207

hence a few of the learned have wished to find him a school in this
sect.* But the merely nagative agreement against the errors of the
Pharisees,-an agreement which, moreover, proceeded from quite
another principle in Jesus than in the Sadducees,-is more than
counterbalanced by the contrast which their religious indifference,
their unbelief in immortality and in spiritual existences, formed with
the disposition of Jesus, and his manner of viewing tlie world. That
tlie controversy with tlie Sadducees is not prominent in the Gospels,
may be very simply explained by the fact that their sect had very
slight influence on the circle with wdiich Jesus was immediately con-
nected, the adherents of Sadduceeism belonging to the higher ranks
alone, f

Concerning one only of tlie then existing Jewish sects can the
question seriously arise, whether we ought not to ascribe to it a po-
sitive influence on the development and appearance of Jesus-the
sect, namely, of the Esseues. ^ In the last century tlie derivation
of Christianity from Esscnism was very much in vogue ; not only
English deists, and among tlie Germans, Bahrdt and Venturini, but
even theologians, such as Staudlin, embraced tlie idea.§  In the

days of freemasonry and secret orders, there was a disposition to
transfer their character to primitive Christianity. The concealment
of an Essenc lodge appeared especially adapted to explain the sud-
den disappearance of Jesus after the brilliant scenes of his infancy
and boyhood, and again after Ills restoration to life. Besides the
forerunner John, tlie two men on the Mount of Transfiguration, and
tlie angels clotlied in white at the grave, and on the Mount of As-
cension, were regarded as members of tlie Essene brotherhood, and
many cures of Jesus and the Apostles were referred to tlie medical
traditions of tlie Essenes. Apart, however, from these fancies of a
bygone age, there are really some essential characteristics wliicli
seem to speak in favour of an intimate relation between Essenism
and Christianity. The most conspicuous as sucli are the prohibition
of o.iths and the community of goods: with the former was con-
nected fidelity, peaceablcness, obedience to every constituted au-
thority; witli tlie latter, contempt of riches, and the custom of
travelling witliout provisions. These and other features, such as
tlie sacred meal partaken in common, the rejection of sanguinary
sacrifices and of slavery, constitute so strong a resemblance between
Esscnism and Christianity, that even so early a writer as Eusebius
mistook tlie Therapeutic, a sect allied to the Essenes, for Chris-
tians. || But there are very essential dissimilarities which must not
be overlooked. Leaving out of consideration the contempt of mar-
riage, vTTEpoi{ila "yd^ov, since Joseplius ascribes it to a part only of
tlie Essenes; tlie asceticism, the punctilious observance of tlie Sab-

* K. g. Des Cotes, Schutzschrift fur Jesus vou Nazaret, S. 128 ff:   f Ncandur, L.
J. Chr. S. 39 tr.   t Vid. Joseph, li. j.-ii. viii. 2-13. Antiq. xviii. i. .'). Comp. Philo,
quod (mwis prabus liver and de vita cout'implaticn.. § This opinion is judiciously developed
by ytilndlin, Ueschichte der Sittenlehre Jcsu 1, S. 570 tt:: and in a romiini.ir innnnrr in

208 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

bath, tlie purifications, and other superstitious usages of tins sect,
their retention of the names of tlie angels, the mystery which they
affected, and their contracted, exclusive devotion to their order, arc
so foreign, nay so directly opposed to the spirit of Jesus, that, espec-
ially as tlie Essencs arc nowhere mentioned in tlie New Testament,
the aid which this sect also contributed to the development of Je-
sus, must The limited to the uncertain influence which might be ex-
ercised over him Toy occasional intercourse with Essenes.*

Did other elements than such as were merely Jcwisli, or at least
confined to Palestine, operate upon Jesus ? Of the heathens settled
in Galilee of the Gentiles, TaAiXaia -S)Y iOvw, there was hardly
much to be learned beyond patience under frequent intercourse with
them. On tho other hand, at the feasts in Jerusalem not only for-
eign Jews, some of whom, as for example the Alexandrian and
Cyrenian Jews, had synagogues there (Acts vi. 9.), but also devout
heathens were to be met with (John xii. 20.); and tliat intercourse
witli tliesc had some influence in extending the intellectual horizon
of Jesus, and spiritualizing his opinions, lias, as we have already
intimated, all historical probability, f

But why do we, in the absence of certain information, labori-
ously seek after uncertain traces of an influence which cotemporary
means of development may have exercised on Jesus ? and yet more,
why, on tlie other side, are these labours so anxiously repudiated ?
Whatever amount of intellectual material may be collected, tlie
spark by which genius kindles it, and fuses its various elements
into a consistent whole, is neither easier to explain nor reduced in
value. Thus it is with Jesus. Allow him to have exhausted tlie
means of development which Ills age afforded: a comprehensive
faculty of reception is with great men ever the reverse side of their
powcrfill originality; allow him to have owed far more to Essenism
and Alexandrianism, and whatever other scliools and tendencies
existed, than we, in our uncertainty, are in a condition to prove:-
still for tlie reformation of a world tliese elements were all too little ;

the leaven necessary for tins he must obtain from the depth of his
own mind.t

But we have not yet spoken of an appearance to wliicli our
Gospels assign a most important influence in developing the activity
of Jesus-tliat of Jolm tlie Baptist. As his ministry is first noticed
in the Gospels in connexion with the baptism and public appearance,
of Jesus, our inquiry concerning him, and his relation to Jesus,
must open the second part.

* Comp. Bcngel, Bemcrkungen uber den Versuch, das Christcntlnnn aus dem Easais-
irtus abzuleitm, in Flatt'a Magazin, 7, S. 126 ff.; Neandcr, L. J. Clir. S. 41 f. -i- This
ia stated with exaggeration by Bahrdt, Briefe uber die Bibel, zweitea Biindchen, ISter,
SOster Brief ff. 4tca Biiiulchen, 4'Jstcr Brief, t Comp. Paulus ut sup. 1, a, 273 ff. Planck,
Geschichte dea Christenthuins in der Periode seiner ersten Einfuhrung 1, S. St. Dii Wette,
bibl. Dogm. § 212. llase L. J. § 38. Winer, liibl. Kealw. S. 677 f. Seander, L. J. Chr.

S. 88 ff.

