CHAPTER III.

ANNOUNCEMENT OP THE CONCEPTION OF JESUS-ITS
SUPERNATURAL CHARA CTEB- VISIT OP MARY TO
ELIZABETH.

§ 23. SKETCH OF THE DIFFERENT CANONICAL AND APOCRYPHAL
ACCOUNTS.

THERE ia a striking gradation in the different representations of
the conception and birth of Jesus given in the canonical and in the
apocryphal gospels. They exhibit the various steps, from a simple
statement of a natural occurrence, to a minute and miraculously em-
bellished history, in which the event is traced back to its very earliest
date. Mark and John presuppose the fact of the birth of Jesus, and

* See DC Wettn, hill. Dogm. and cxeg. Handbuch 1,1, S. 14 ; Hasa. I,. J, Eusdiius
gives a not improbable explanation of this disagreement (ad. Steph. qn^st. iii. pointed out
by Crediirr, 1, p. GS f.) that besides the notion amongst the Jews, that the Messiah must.
spring from the royal line. of David, another had arisen, tliat this line having become pol-
luted and declared ui-nvorthy of continuing on the throne of ••David, (Jcreni. xxii. 30,) by
tile 'wickedness of its later reigning members, a line more pure though less famed "WPS to
lie pi-rfrrred to it. + The farther considerations on the origin and import of these gene.'il-
oiries. whn-h •";- "••,"'! their connexion "with the account of the miraculous birth of Jesus,

CONCEPTION OF JESUS--ITS SUPEENATURAL CHARACTER. 105

content themselves with the incidental mention of Mary as the

mother (Mark vi. 3), and of Joseph as the father of Jesus (John i.
46). Matthew and Luke go further back, since tlicy state the par-
ticular circumstances attending tlie conception as well as tlie birth
of tlie Messiah. But of these two evangelists Luke •mounts a step
higher than Matthew. According to tlie latter Mary, the betrothed
of Joscpli, being found -with child, Joseph is offended and deter-
mines to put her away; but the angel of the Lord visits him in a
dream, and assures him of the divine origin and exalted destiny of
Mary's offspring; tlie result of which is tliat Joscpli takes unto him
his wife: but knows her not till slie lias brought forth her first-born
son. (Matt. i. 18-25.) Here the pregnancy is discovered in the
first place, and then afterwards justified by tlie angel; but in Luke
tlie pregnancy is prefaced and announced by a celestial apparition.
The same Gabriel, who had predicted tlie birth of John to Zaclia-
rias, appears to Mary, tlie betrothed of Joseph, and tells her that
she sliall conceive by tlie power of the Holy Ghost: whereupon tlie
destined mother of tlie Messiah pays a visit full of holy import to
the already pregnant mother of Ills forerunner ; upon which occasion
botli Mary and Llizabeth pour forth their emotions to one another
in the form of a hymn, (Luke i. 26-56). Matthew and Luke are
content to presuppose tlie connexion between Mary and Josepli; but
the apocryphal gospels, tlie ProtevawJdium Jucubi, and tlie Evwi-
gelium de .N'litlcitatti Iflaruie* (books with tlie contents of which
tlie Fathers partially agree), seek to represent the origin of this con-
nexion ; indeed tlicy go back to tlie birtli of Mary, and describe it
to have been preceded, equally with that of the Messiah and tlie
Baptist, by a divine annunciation. As the description of tlie birth
of Jolin in Luke is principally borrowed from tlie Old Testament
accounts of Samuel and of Samson, so this history of the birth of
Mary is an imitation of the history in Luke, and of the Old Testa-
ment histories.

Joachim, so says tlie apocryphal narrative, and Anna (tlie name
of Samuel's mothcrf) arc unhappy on account of their long childless
marriage (as were tlie parents of the Baptist); when an angel appears
to them both (so in tlie history of Samson) at different places, and
promises them a child, who sliall be the mother of God, and com-
mands tliat this cliild shall live the life of a Nazarite (like the Bap-
tist). In early childhood Mary is brought by her parents to tlie
temple (like Samuel); where she continues till licr twelfth year, vis-
ited and fed by angels and honoured by divine visions. Arrived at
wo'manliood she is to quit tlie temple, her future provision and des-
tiny lacing revealed by the oracle to tlie liigli priest. In conformity
with the prophecy of Isaiah, xi. 1 f.: egredietur virga de radios

* Fabricius, Codex apocryplms N. T. 1, p. 19 ff. GO ff.; Tliilo, 1, p. 1G1 ff. 319 ff.

•f Gregory of Xyssa or his interpolator ia reminded of this mother of Samuel by the
apocryphal A.nna when lie says of her : MtyittTat Toivvv Kal avTTi ru ircpi n/c pjT-poc TOV
2a^of?//l SiTjyf/fMra K. r. \. Fabricius 1, p. u.

THE LITE OF JESUS.

106

Jesse, ct flos de radice ejus ascended, et reyuiescet super sum spi-
ritzis Domini; tins oracle commanded, according to one gospel*, that
all tlie unmarried men of tlic house of David,-according to the
other,! that all the widowers among the people,-should bring their
rods and that he on wliose rod a sign should appear (like the rod of
Aaron, Numb. xvii.), namely tlie siq-n predicted in the prophecy,
should take Alary unto himself.  Tills sign was manifested upon
Joseph's rod; for, in exact accordance witli tlic oracle, it put forth
a blossom and a dove liglitcd upon it4 The apocryphal gospels and
tlie fathers agree in representing Joseph as an old man :§ but tlie
narrative is somewhat differently told in the two apocryphal gospels.
According to the Evang, de, nativ. Mariae, notwithstanding Mary's
alleged vow of chastity, and the refusal of Joseph on account of his
great age, bctrothment took place at tlie command of tlic priest, and
subsequently a marriage-(which marriage, however, tlic author evi-
dently means to represent also as chaste). According to tlie Prot-
evany. Jacobi, on tlie contrary, neither betrothnicnt nor marriage are
mentioned, but Joseph is regarded merely as tlic chosen protector of
tlic young virgin,|] and Joseph on the journey to Bethlehem doubts
whether lie aliall describe his charge as his wife or as Ills daughter;

fearing to bring ridicule upon himself, on account of his age, if lie
called her Ins wife. Again, where in Matthew Mary is called f] yvvfj
of Josepli, tlie apocryphal gospel carefully designates lier merely as
ij -raZc, and even avoids using tlie term 7rapo/l(ij3e7v or substitutes
rfca^vAa^ot, with wliicli many of the Fathers concur. ^ In tlic Prot-
eva'/iyrlicilm it is farther related tliat Mary, having been received into
Joseph's house, was charged, together witli other young women, with
tlic fabrication of tlic veil for tlic temple, and tliat it fell to her lot to
spin tlie true purple. But. wliilst Joseph was absent on business
Mary was visited by an angel, and Josepli on his return found her
witli child and called licr to account, not as a husband, but as tlie.
guardian of her honour. Mary, however, liad forgotten tlic words
of tlic angel and protested her ignorance of the cause of her preg-
nancy. Josepli was perplexed and determined to remove her secretly
from under his protection; but an angel appeared to him in a dream
and reassured liiin by Ills explanation. Tlic matter was then brought
before tlie priest, and botli Josepli and Mary being charged witli .in-
continence were condemned to drink the "bitter water,'"**" vSuip -//c
e/ley^iuc, but as they remained uninjured by it, they were declared
innocent. Then follows tlic account of tlic taxing and of the birth

of Jesus.ft

* Evang. dc nativ. Mar. c. 7: ruitctns de d'nna et fnnulvi J)nvid nvptiii hnWes, non
cavj-iigittns.  f I'rotcv. Jac. c. 8: T0!'lc• OTperovras' Tor ^aoi). \ It is thus in the Evang. de
nativ. Mariae vii. and viii.; but rather different in the I'rotiiv. Jac. c. ix.  § I'rotuv. c. 9:

wpECTiji'T';;?. EvaiiK. ile nativ. Mar, S.: granilacvus. Epiphan. adv. haeres. 7S, S: ^a/i/3tt-
vn ri/v Map/'av ^//poc- KCITU^W f^idav Trfpt TTOD oyfiof/KovTa e-ur nal 7-puffd) 6 ury/p. ]1 lla-
oa^aftf ai'ri/v ui; T^JIIJOLV mtWTo. c. ix. Compare with Evun^. de nativ. Mar. viii. ard x.

*[ See tin-' variations in 7'fiiio p. 227. and the ({notations from tlic Fathers at p. 3G;'> not.

** Niunli. v. IS. tt I'rotcv. J. x-xvi. Tlii.' account in the Evang. de nativ. Mar. ia

^ a

CONCEPTION OF JESUS--ITS SUPERNATURAL CHARACTER. 107

Since these apocryphal narratives were for a long period held as
historical by the church, and were explained, equally with those of
the canonical accounts, from the supranaturalistic point of view as
miraculous, they were entitled in modern times to share witli tlie
New Testament histories tlie benefit of tlie natural explanation. If,
on the one hand, tlie belief in tlic marvellous was so superabundantly
strong in tlie ancient church, tliat it readied beyond tlie limits of the
New Testament even to tlic embracing of the apocryphal narratives,
blinding tlic eye to tlic perception of their manifestly unhistorical
character; so, on the other hand, tlic positive rationalism of some of
the heralds of the modern modes of explanation was so ovcrstrong
tliat tlicv believed it adequate to explain even tlie apocryphal mira-
cles.  Of tills we have an example in the author of the natural his-
tory of tlic great Prophet of Nazareth ;* wlio docs not hesitate to
include tlie &-torics of tlie lineage and early years of Mary witliin tlie
circle of Ills representations, and to give them a natural explanation.
If we in our day, with a perception of tlie fabulous character of such
narratives, look down alike upon tlic Fathers of tlic church and upon
these naturalistic interpreters, we arc certainly so far in tlic right, as
it is only by gross ignorance tliat tills character of (lie, apocryphal
accounts is here to be mistaken ; more closely considered, however,
the difference between tlie apocryphal and tlie canonical narratives
concerning the early history of tlic Baptist and of Jesus, is seen to
be merely a difference of form : they have sprung, as wo sliall here-
after find, from tlie same root, though tlie one is a fresh and healthy
sprout, and tlic other an artilicLilly nurtured and weak aftcrgrowtli.
Still, tlic Fathers of the church and these naturalistic interpreters
had this superiority over most of tlic theologians of our own time;

tliat they did not allow themselves to be deceived respecting the
inherent similarity by tlie difference of form, but interpreted the
kindred narratives by the same method; treating both as miraculous
or both as natural; and not, as is now usual, tlie one as fiction and
the other as history.

§ 24. DISAGREEMENTS OF THE CANONICAL GOSPELS IN RELATION
TO THE FORM OF THE ANNUNCIATION.

AFTER the foregoing general sketch, we now proceed to examine
the external circumstances which, according to our gospels, attended
tlie first comniimication of the future birth of Jesus to Mary and
Josepli.  Leaving out of siglit, for tlie present, the special import
of tlie annunciation, namely, that Jesus should be supernaturally
begotten of tlie Holy Ghost, w^e shall, in tlie first place, consider
merely tlic form of tlic announcement; by whom, when, and in what
manner it was made.

As tlic birth of the Baptist was previously announced by an
angel, so tlic conception of Jesus was, according to the gospel his-

108

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

•tones, proclaimed after the same fashion. But whilst in tlie one
case, we have l>ut one history of the apparition, tliat of Luke; in
tlie other we have two accounts, accounts however wliicli do not cor-
respond, and which we must now compare. Apart from tlie essential
signification the two accounts exhibit the following differences. 1. The
individual wlio appears is called in Matthew by the indefinite appella-
tion, angd of t!ie .Lord, ay-ye/loc Kvplov: in Luke by name, the angel
Gabriel, b ayye/lo? ra,3p(?;/l. 2. Tlie person to whom the angel appears
is, according to Matthew, Joseph, according to Luke, Mary. 3. In
Matthew tlie apparation is seen in a dream, in Luke whilst awake.
4. There is a disagreement in relation to the time at which the appari-
tion took place : according to Matthew, Joseph receives tlie heavenly
communication after Mary was already pregnant: according to Luke
it is made to Mary prior to her pregnancy. 5. Lastly, Loth the pur-
pose of tlie apparition and the effect produced arc different; it was de-
signed, according to Matthew, to comfort Joseph, who was troubled-
on account of tlie pregnancy of his betrothed: according to Luke
to prevent, by a previous announcement, all possibility of offence.

Where tlie discrepancies are so great and so essential, it may,
at first siglit, appear altogether superfluous to inquire whether tlie
two Evangelists record one and tlie same occurrence, though with
considerable disagreement; or whether they record distinct occur-
rences, so tliat tlie two accounts can be blended togetlicr, and the
one be made to amplify tlie other ? The first supposition cannot be
admitted witliout impeaching the historical validity of the narrative ;

for which reason most of our theologians, indeed all who see in tlie
narrative a true history, wlietlier miraculous or natural, have de-
cided in favour of tlie second supposition. Maintaining, and justly,
that tlie silence of one Evangelist concerning an event wliicli is nar-
rated by tlie other, is not a negation of the event,* they blend tlie
two accounts together in the following manner: 1, First, the angct
makes known to Mary her approaching pregnancy (Luke); 2, slic
then journeys to Elizabeth (tlie same gospel); 3, after her return
her situation being discovered, Joscpli takes offence (Matthew);

whereupon, 4, he likewise is visited by an angelic apparition (tlie
same gospel, f)

But tills arrangement of the incidents is, as Schlcicrmachcr lias
already remarked, full of difficulty -;f and it seems that what is re-
lated by one Evangelist is not only not presupposed, but excluded,
by tlie 'other. For, in the first place, tlie conduct of the angel wlio
appears to Joseph is not csisily explained, if tlie same or another
angel liad previously appeared to Mary. The angel (in Matthew)
speaks altogether as if his communication were tlie first in tins
affair: he neither refers to the message previously received by Mary,
nor reproaches Joseph because he had not believed it; but more

* Augustiu, de coasens. enangtiist, U. 5.  •)• Paulas, Olshausen, Fritzsche, Coiiim. in
Tu'-tn, „ r.i;    + r'nnin do Wct.t.K'a exes*. IIandbuch i. 1, S. lt>.    S-irhltiicrinaclier uber

.CONCEPTION OF JESUS-ITS SUPERNATURAL CHARACTER. 109

tlian all, the informing Joseph of the name of the expected child,
and the giving him a full detail of the reasons wdly he should be so
called, (Matt. i. 21.) would have been wholly superfluous liad the an-
gel (according to Luke i. 31.) already indicated this name to Mary.

Still more incomprehensible is the conduct of the betrothed
parties according to this arrangement of events. Had Mary been
visited by an angel, who had made known to her an approaching
supernatural pregnancy, would not tlie first impulse of a delicate
woman liave been, to hasten to impart to her betrothed the import
of the divine message, and by tills means to anticipate the humiliat-
ing discovery of her situation, and an injurious suspicion on the
part of her affianced husband. But exactly this discovery Mary
allows Joseph to make from others, and thus excites suspicions ; for
it is evident that the expression evpiOrj ev •yocr-p't g^owo (Matth. i.
18.) signifies a discovery made independent of any communication
oh Mary's part, and it is equally clear that in this manner only does
Joseph obtain the knowledge of her situation, since his conduct is
represented as the result of that discovery (evpiaKsoOai\.  The apo-
cryphal Protevangdmm Jacobi felt how enigmatical Mary's conduct
must appear, and sought to solve the difficulty in a manner wdiich,
contemplated from the supranaturalistic point of view, is, perhaps
the most consistent. Had Mary retained a recollection of the im-
port of the heavenly message-upon this point the whole ingenious
representation of the apocryphal gospel rests-she ought to liave
imparted it to Joseph; but since it is obvious from Joseph's de-
meanour that she did not acquaint him with it, the only remaining
alternative is, to admit tliat tlie mysterious communication made to
Mary had, owing to her excited state of mind, escaped her memory,
and that she was herself ignorant of the true cause of her preg-
nancy.* In fact, nothing is left to supranaturalisra in the present
case but to seek refuge in the miraculous and the incomprehensible.
Tlie attempts which the modern theologians of this class have made
to explain Mary's silence, and even to find in it an admirable trait
in her character, are so many rash and abortive efforts to make a
virtue of necessity. According to liessf it must have cost Mary
much self-denial to have concealed the communication of the angel
•from Joseph; and this reserve, in a matter known only to herself
and to God, must be regarded as a proof of lier firm trust in God.
Without doubt Mary communed thus with herself: It is not without
a purpose tliat this apparition has been made to me alone, liad it
been intended that Josepli sliould liave participated in tlie communi-
cation, the angel would have appeared to him also (if each individual
favoured with a divine revelation were of this opinion, how many
special revelations would it not require?); besides it is an affair of

* Protev. Jac. c. 12 : Map(U|U St. i-iTcAai^ero TUV ^varftp'MV uv sl^e irpof avrrjv Ta-
"pt%3.. Wliun questioned by Josepli she assures him with tears: ou yivuaw, wfliv earl
TOVTO T-A iv rg yaorpt fiov. c. 13.  f. Geschichte dur drci letzten Lebeuajalire Jesu u. a. w.

110

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

God alone, consequently it becomes me to leave it witli him to con-
vince Joseph (tlie argument of indolence). Olshauscn concurs, and
adds his favourite general remark, tliat in relation to events so extra-
ordinary tlic measure of the ordinary occurrences of tlie world is
not applicable: a category under which, in tins instance, the highly
essential considerations of delicacy and propriety arc included.

More in accordance with tlie views of tlic natural interpreters,
the Evanydimn de nativitate Marm* and subsequently some later
writers, for example, tlic author of tlic natural history of tlic great
prophet of Nazareth, have sought to explain Mary's silence, by sup-
posin0' Joseph to have been at a distance from tlie abode of his at-
lianccd bride at tlic time of the heavenly communication. Accord-
in"- to them Mary was of Nazareth, Joseph of Bethlehem ; to which
latter place Joseph departed after tlie betrothing, and did not return
to Mary until tlic expiration of three months; when lie discovered
the pregnancy which had taken place in the interim. But since tlic
assumption that Mary and Joseph resided in different localities lias
no foundation, as will presently be seen, in tlic canonical gospels,
tlie whole explanation falls to tlie ground. Without such an as-
sumption, Mary's silence towards Joseph miglit, perhaps, liave been
accounted for from tlic point of view of tlic naturalistic interpreters,
Ly imagining her to have been held back through modesty from.
confessing a situation so liable to excite suspicion. But one wlio,
like Mary, was so fully convinced of the divine agency in tlic mat-
ter, and liad shown so ready a comprehension of her mysterious des-
tination (Luke i. 38.) could not possibly have been tongue-tied by
petty considerations of false shame.

Consequently, ir order to rescue Mary's character, without 'bring-
in"- reproach upon Joseph's, and at the same time to render his un-
belief intelligible, interpreters have been compelled to assume that
a communication, though a tardy one, was actually made by Mary,
to Joscpli. Like tlie last-named apocryphal gospel, they introduce
a journey, not of Josepli, but of Mary-tlic visit to Elizabeth men-
tioned in Luke-to account, for tlic postponement of tlic communi-
cation. It is probable, says Paulus, that Mary did not open her
heart to Joscpli before this journey, because she wished rirst to
consult "with her older friend as to tlie mode of making tlie dis-
closure to him, and whether she, as tlie. mother of the Messiah,
ouglit to marry.

It \vas not till after her return, and tlicn most likely through
the medium of others, tliat slie made Joscpli acquainted witli her
situation, and with the promises she liad received. But Joseph's
mind was not properly attuned and prepared for such a disclosure;

he became haunted by all kinds of thoughts; and vacillated be-
tween suspicion and hope till a length a dream, (lecidod him.t But
in tlie nrst place a motive is here given to Mary's journey which
is forei"-n to tlie account in Luke. Mary sets off to Elizabeth, not

CONCEPTION OF JESUS--ITS SUPEENATUEAL CHAEACTEE. Ill

to take counsel of her, but to assure herself regarding the sign ap-
pointed by tlie angel. No uneasiness which the friend is to dissi-
pate, but a proud joy, unalloyed by the smallest anxiety, is ex-
pressed in her salutation to the future mother of tlic Baptist. But
besides, a confession so tardily made can in nowise justify Mary.
What behaviour on tlie part of an affianced bride-after having re-
ceived a 'divine communication, so nearly concerning her future hus-
band, and in a matter so delicate-to travel miles away, to absent
herself for three months, and tlien to permit her betrothed to learn
through third persons that which could no longer be concealed!

Those, therefore, wdio do not impute to Mary a line of conduct
which ccrtaiiily our Evangelists do not impute to her, must allow
tliat. slie imparted tlie message of the angel to her future husband
as soon as it liad been revealed to her; but tliat lie did not believe
her.* But now let us sec how Joscpli's character is to be dealt
witli! Even lless is of opinion tliat, since Joseph was acquainted
with Mary, lie liad no cause to doubt her word, when slie told him
of the apparition she liad liad. Tills scepticism presupposes a mis-
trust of his betrothed wliicli is incompatible witli his character as a
just man (Matt. i. 19.) and an incredulity respcctino- the marvel-
lous wliicli is difficult to reconcile with a readiness on other occa-
sions to believe in angelic apparitions; nor, in any case, would this
want of faith have escaped the censure of tlie angel who subse-
quently appeared to himself.

Since then, to suppose tliat tlie two accounts are parallel, and
complete one another, leads unavoidably to results inconsistent with
tlie sense of the Gospels, in so far as they evidently meant to re-
present tlic characters of Joseph and Mary as free from blemish;

tlic supposition cannot be admitted, but the accounts mutually ex-
clude cadi other. An angel did not appear, first to Mary, and also
afterwards to Josepli; he can only have appeared either to tlie one
or to tlic oilier.  Consequently, it is only tlic ore or tlie other re-
lation wliicli can be, regarded as historical. And here different con-
siderations would conduct to opposite decisions.  The history in
Matthew miglit appear tlic more probable from tlic rationalistic point
of view, because it is more easy to interpret naturally an apparition
in a dream; whilst that in Luke miglit be preferred by the supra-
naturalistic, because the manner in wliicli tlic suspicion cast upon
the holy virgin is refuted is more worthy of God. But in fact, a.
nearer examination proves, tliat neither lias any essential claim to
be advanced before tlie other. Botli contain an angelic apparition,
and both are therefore encumbered witli all tlic difficulties wliicli, as
was stated above in relation to the annunciation of the birth of tlio
Baptist, oppose tlie belief in angels and apparitions. Again, in. both
narrations the import of tlie angelic message is, as v/e sliall pres-
ently see, an impossibility. . Thus every criterion wliicli might de-
termine the adoption of the one, and the rejection of tlie other, dis-

lation wliicli can be, regarded as historical.

112 THE LIFE OF JE8US.

appears; and we find ourselves, in reference to both accounts, driven
Tback by necessity to the mythical view.

From this point of view, all the various explanations, which the
Rationalists have attempted to give of the two apparitions, vanish
of them selves.  Paulus explains the apparition in Matthew as a
natural dream, occasioned Tby Mary's previous communication of the.
announcement which liad been made to her; and witli wliicli Joseph
must have been acquainted, because this alone can account for Ills
having heard tlie same words in his dream, which tlic angel had
beforehand addressed to Mary: but much rather, is it precisely tins
similarity in the language of tlie presumed second angel to tliat of
the first, witli the absence of all reference by tlic latter to the for-
mer, which proves that the words of tlie first angel were not pre-
supposed by tlie second. Besides, tlie natural explanation is annihi-
lated the moment tlic narratives are shown to be mythical. The
same remark applies to the explanation, expressed guardedly indeed
by Paulas, but openly by the author of the "Natural history of the
great prophet of Nazareth," namely, that the angel who visited Mary
(in Luke) was a human being; of which we must speak hereafter.

According to all tliat has been said, the following is the only
judgment we can form of the origin of tlie two narratives of the
angelic apparitions. Tlie conception of Jesus through tlie power
of the Holy Ghost ought not to be grounded upon a mere uncertain
suspicion; it must have been clearly and positively asserted; and
to flits end a messenger from heaven was required, since theocratic
decorum seemed to demand it far more in relation to the birth of
the Messiali, than of a Samson or a John. Also the words which
the angels use, correspond in part witli tlie Old Testament annun-
ciations of extraordinary children.* The appearing of tlie angel in
tlic one narrative beforehand to Mary, but in the other at a later
period to Joseph, is to be regarded as a variation in tlie legend or
in the composition, which finds an explanatory counterpart in the
history of tlie annunciation of Isaac.  Jehovah (Gen. xvii. 15.)
promises Abraham a son by Sarah, upon which tlie Patriarch can-
not refrain from laughing; but he receives a repetition of the assur-
ance ; Jehovah (Gen. xviii. 1, ft.) makes this promise under the
Terebinth tree at Mamre, and Sarah laughs as if it were something
altogether novel and unheard of by her; lastly, according to Gen.

* Gen. xvii. 19; LXX. (Annunciation of                Matth. i. 21

Isaac) :                                (w <!>o0l)Sij(; •^aoa'ha3dv Mapiuvt Tyv ymal-
iSov SuAAo il •JWTI own TE^eTdt cm vlov, KQ?   na am - ) TS^STCH OE vlov, Kal na^eaeif r&
KOAECEl-f; TO ovoua QVTOV 'loatlK.               ovoua (IVTOV 'l^frovv CUTOC yap cuaet. TOY ^.a-
Judg. xiii. 5.   (Annunciation of Sam- : or avTov u,v0 TUV u^apnuv HVTUV,

son):

KO.I aiiTo(; uoiferot auacu ror 'looa^l in ;[ctpof

^VAiOTUp..

Gen. xvi. 11 ff.   (Annunciation of Ish-               Luke i. 10 ff.

mael):                                   toi elvev 6 i'/yE^oc airy ISov cv^vfrg iv
Ka ECT ev air^ o u-j'yc'Aol: Kuotoi) iSov ai' b>   -yaarpt, itai ri^f vim, nai Kakiwcs T& ovo/icr

•yacrpi c^EtC- Kal TE$T? vlov KCU KaAErretf T^   ai'rov 'ITJOOVV   OVTCK; ^orcii,

CONCEPTION OP JESUS-ITS SUPEENATUEAL CHAEACTER. 113

xxi. 5 ff. it is first after Isaac's birth that Sarah mentions tlie
laughing of the people, which is said to have been the occasion of
his name; whereby it appears tliat this last history docs not pre-
suppose tlie existence of the two other accounts of the annunciation
of tlie birth of Isaac.* As in relation to the birth of Isaac, different;

legends or poems were formed without reference to one another,
some simpler, some more embellished: so we have two discordant
narratives concerning tlie birth of Jesus. Of these tlie narrative in
Matthewf is tlie simpler and ruder style of composition, since it
docs not avoid, tliougli it be but by a transient suspicion on the
part of Joseph, tlie throwing a shade over the character of Mary
wliich is only subsequently removed; tliat in Luke, on the contrary,
is a more refined and artistical representation, exhibiting Mary from
the first in tlic pure light of a bride of heaven. {

§ 25. IMPORT OF THE ANGEL'S MESSAGE--FULFILLMENT OF THE
PROPHECY OF ISAIAH.

ACCORDING to Luke, the angel who appears to Mary, in the first
place informs her only that she shall become pregnant, without spe-
cifying after what manner: that she shall bring forth a son and call
his name Jesus; he sliall be great, and shall be called the Son of
the Highest (i'(oc vipia-ov): and God sliall give unto him the throne
of his father David, and lie shall reign over tlie house of Jacob for
ever. The subject, the Messiah, is liere treated precisely in the
language common to the Jews, and even the term Son of t!ie Highest,
if nothing further followed, must be taken in the same sense; as
according to 2 Sam. vii. 14. PS. ii. 7. an ordinary king of Israel
might be so named; still more, tlicrefore, the greatest of these kings,
the Messiali, even considered merely as a man. This Jewish lan-
guage reflects in addition a new light upon the question of the his-
toric validity of the angelic apparition; for we must agree with
Schleicrmacher that the real angel Gabriel would liardly have pro-
claimed tlie advent of the Messiali in a phraseology so strictly
Jewish :§ for which reason we are inclined to coincide witli this the-
ologian, and to ascribe this particular portion of tlie history, as also
tliat which precedes and relates to tlie Baptist, to one and the same
Jewish-christian author. It is not till Mary opposes the fiict of her

* Comp. de Wett'e, Kritik der mosaischen Gcschichte, S. 86 ffi

•(• The vision, which according to Matthew, Joseph had in his sleep, had besides a
kind of typ.,; in the "vi^on by which, according to the Jewish tradition related by Jo-
sephus, tlie father of Moses was comforted under similar circumstances, when suffering
anxiety concerning the pregnancy of hi? wife, although for a ditferent reason. Joseph.
Antiq. I[, ix., 3. " A man "whose name was Amram, one of the nobler sort of Hebrews,
was afraid for, his whole nation, rest it should fail, by the want of young men to be brought
up hereafter, and was very uneasy at it, his wife being then with child, and he knew not
•what to do. Hereupon he betook himself to prayer to God i , i   Accordingly God
had mercy on him, and was moved by his supplication. He stood by him in his sleep,
and exhorted him not to despair of his future favours, i i For this child of thine shall
deliver the Hebrew nation from the distress they are under from tha Egyptians. His
memory sliall lie famous while the world lasts."   j: Compare Ammon, Furtbildung des

Pin.;..+,,,,H>,..*^   ;   U   OnU p     S TT.-il,,,,. ,1;,> t.'.^rli'tnr, .111- T nl-.lo   S;  9 •I

114 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

virginity to the promises of a son, tliat the angel defines the nature
of the conception: tliat it sliall Le by the IIolv Ghost, by tlie power
of tlie Highest; after which the appellation vioc; v^li-i-ov receives a
more precise metaphysical sense.  As a confirmatory sign that a
matter ot tins kind is nowise impossible to God, Mary is referred
to tliat wliicli liad occurred to her relative Elizabeth: whereupon, slie
resigns herself in faith to tlie divine determination respecting her.

In Matthew, where the main point is to dissipate Joseph's anx-
iety, the angel begins at once witli tlie communication, that tlie
cliild conceived by Mary is, (as tlie Evangelist liad already stated of
his own accord, chap. i. 18.), of the Holy Ghost (rrvEvfia S,yiov\;

and hereupon the Messianic destination of Jesus is first pointed out
by tire expression, lie shall save his people from their sins. This
language may seem to sound less Jcwisli than that by which tlie
Messianic station of the cliild who should be born, is set forth in
Luke; it is however to be observed, tliat under the term sins (afiap-
Tta(c) is comprehended the punishment of tliose sins, namely, the
subjection of the people to a foreign yoke; so that here also the Jcw-
isli element is not wanting; as neither in Luke, on tlie other hand,
is tlie higher destination of the Messiah left wliolly out of siglit,
since under tlie term to reign ftauiAEVEiv, tlie rule over an obedient
and regenerated people is included. Next is subjoined by the aii-
gel, or more probably by the narrator, an oracle from the Old Tes-
tament, introduced by tlie often recurring phrase, all this teas done,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken, of the J^ord by the
prophet, [v. 22.].  It is the prophecy .from Isaiah, (chap. vii. 14.)
which tlie conception of Jesus after this manner should accomplish:

•namely, a virgin shall be u'ith child, and shall briny forth a son,
and they shall call his name .Emmamiel-God-with-us.

The original sense of this passage in Isaiah is, according to
modern research,* this. The prophet is desirous of giving Ahaz,
wlio, through fear of tlie kings of Syria and Israel, was disposed to
make a treaty witli Assyria, a lively assurance of the speedy des-
truction of Ills much dreaded enemies; and lie therefore says to
him: suppose tliat an unmarried woman now on the point of be-
coming a wifef sliall conceive; or categorically: a certain young
woman is, or is about to be with cliild; (perhaps tlie prophet's own

•wife); now, before tills child is born, the political aspect of affairs
shall be so mucli improved, tliat a name of good omen sliall be given
to tlie cliild; and before he sliall be old enough to use his reason,

•the power of tlicse enemies shall be completely annihilated.  Tliat
is to say, prosaically expressed; before nine months sliall have

* Compare Gcsenius und Hitzi^. Commentatoren xurn Jesaia ; uber (Ue Geburt de8
Iiumanuel dureli elm' .1 unyt'rau, in den theologischen Stnditin u. Kntiken, 1830, 3. Heft,
S. 541 ft'. \ 'lllis explanation does away with the importance of controversy respecting
the •word r\V^S,  Moreover it ought to 1)C decided by the fart that tlie word does not
signify an iniiiiaculate, but a marriageable yonng wom;u], (see (i<'scn'tms\ So early aa

CONCEPTION OF JESUS-ITS SUPERNATURAL CHARACTER. 115

passed awav, the condition of the kingdom shall be amended, and
within about three years the danger sliall have disappeared. Thus
much, at all events, is demonstrated by modern criticism, that, un-
der tlie circumstances stated by Isaiah in the introduction to tlie
oracle, it is only a sign having reference to tlie actual moment and
the near future, wliicli could liave any meaning.  How ill chosen,
according to IIengstenberg's* interpretation, is tlie prophet's lan-
guage : As certainly as tlie day shall arrive when, in fulfilment of tlie
covenant, the Messiah sliall be born, so impossible is it that the
people among whom lie shall arise, or the family whence lie shall
spring, shall pass away. How ill-judged, on the part of tlie prophet,
to endeavour to make tlie improbability of a speedy deliverance ap-
pear less improbable, by an appeal to a yet greater improbability in
the far distant future!-And tlien tlie given limit of a few years!
The overthrow of tlie two kingdoms, such is Hengstcnberg's expla-
nation, sliall take place-not in the immediately succeeding years,
before the cliild specified shall have acquired tlie use of his reason
but-within such a space of time, as in tlie far future will elapse
between tlie birth of tlie Messiah and the first development of hia
mental powers ; therefore in about three years. What a monstrous
confounding of times! A. child is to be born in tlie distant future,
and that which sliall happen before this cliild sliall know how to use
his reason, is to take place in the nearest present time.

Thus Panlus and his party are decidedly right in opposing to
Hengstenberg and Ins party, tliat tlie prophecy of Isaiah has rela-
tion, in its original local signification, to the then existing circum-
stances, and not to tlie future Messiah, still less to Jesus.  Heng-
stenberg, on tlie other hand, is equally in the right, when in op-
position to Paulus he maintains, that tlie passage from Isaiah is
adopted by Mattlicw as a prophecy of tlie birth of Jesus of a vir-
gin. Whilst tlie ortliodox commentators explain the often recurring
that it might be fulfilled (t'va 'rr/l^piyi')^), and similar expressions
as signifying: tills happened by divine arrangement, in order tliat
the Old Testament prophecy, wliicli in its very origin had refer-
ence to the New Testament occurrence, might be fulfilled;-the
rationalistic interpreters, on tlie contrary understand merely: this
took place after such a manner, that it was so constituted, that
the Old Testament words, which, originally indeed, had relation
to something different, should admit of being so applied; and in
such application alone, do they receive their full verification.  In
the first explanation, the relation between the Old Testament pas-
sage afed the New Testament occurrence is objective, arranged by
God himself: in tlie last it is only subjective, a relation perceived
by tlie later author; according to the former it is a relationship at
once precise and essential: according to the latter both inexact and
adventitious. But opposed'to this latter interpretation of New Tes-
tament passages, wliicli point out an Old Testament prophecy as

116

THE LIFE 01' JESCS.

fulfilled, is the language, and equally so the spirit of the New Tes-
tament writers. The language: for neither can 'rr^fjpoWa.i signify
in such connexion any tiling than ratum fieri, eventu comprobari,
nor iva OTWC any tiling than. eo consilio ut, whilst tlic extensive adop-
tion of Iva KK.[3a~i.K.w has arisen only from dogmatic perplexity.*
But such an interpretation ia altogether at variance witli the Judaical
spirit of the authors of the gospels. Paulus maintains that the
Orientalist does not seriously believe that tlie ancient prophecy was
designedly spoken, or was accomplished by God, precisely in order
that it should prefigure a modern event, and vice versa ; but this is to
carry over our sober European modes of thought into the imagina-
tive life of the Orientals. When however Paulus adds; much
rather did tlie coincidence of a later event with an earlier prophecy
assume only tlie form of a designed coincidence in the mind of the
Oriental: he thus, at once, annuls his previous assertion; for this
ia to admit, that, wdiat in our view is mere coincidence, appeared to
the oriental mind tlie result of design; and we must acknowledge
this to be the meaning of an oriental representation, if we would
interpret it according to its original signification. It is well known
that tlic later Jews found prophecies, of the time being and of the
future, everywhere in tlie Old Testament; and tliat thev constructed
a complete image of the future Messiah, out of various, and in part
falsely interpreted, Old Testament passages.! And tlic Jew be-
lieved lie saw in tlie application lie gave to tlie Scripture, however
perverted it might be, an actual fulnlment of tlic prophecy. In tlie
words of Olshausen: it is a mere dogmatic prejudice to attribute to
this formula, wdicn used by the New Testament writers, an alto-
gether different sense from that which it habitually bears among
their countrymen; and this solely with the view to acquit them of
the sin of falsely interpreting tlie Scripture.

Many theologians of tlic present day are sufficiently impartial to
admit, witli regard to tlic Old Testament, in opposition to tlic an-
cient orthodox interpretation, tliat many of tlie prophecies originally
referred to near events; but they are not sufficiently rash, with re-
gard to the New Testament, to side witli tlie rationalistic commen-
tators, and to deny the decidedly Messianic application which the
New Testament writers make of these prophecies ; they are still too
prejudiced to allow, tliat here and there the New Testament hag
falsely interpreted the Old.  Consequently, they have recourse to
the expedient of distinguishing a double sense in tlic prophecy ; tlie
one relating to a near and minor occurrence, the other to a future
and more important event; and thus they neither offend against the
plain grammatical and historical sense of tlie Old Testament passage
on the one hand, nor distort or deny the signification of the New
Testament passage on tlie other. ^ Tims, in tlie prophecy of Isaiah

* Sec Wincr, Grammatik des neutest. Sprachidioms, 3te Aufl. S. 382 ff. Fritzsche,
Conim. in Matth. p. 49. 317 und Excurs. 1, pi 83(i ff. •j' See the Introduction, § 14.

CONCEPTION OF JESL'S-ITS SUPERNATURAL CHARACTER. 117

•under consideration, tlie spirit of prophecy, they contend, had a
double intention : to announce a near occurrence, the delivery of the
affianced bride of tlic prophet, and also a distinct event in the far

distant future, namely tlic birth of tlie Messiah of a vira-in.  But a

'                  */                                                                                        '"i

double sense so monstrous owes its origin to dogmatic perplexity
alone.  It lias been adopted, as Olshausen himself remarks, in or-
der to avoid tlie offensive admission that tlie New Testament wri-
ters, and Jesus himself, did not interpret tlic Old Testament rightly,
or, more properly speaking, according to modern principles of exe-
gesis, but explained it after tlic manner of their own age, which was
not tlic most correct. But so little does this offence exist for the
unprejudiced, that tlie reverse would be the greater difficulty, that
is, if. contrary to all tlic laws of historical and national development,
tlie New Testament writers liad elevated themselves completely
above the modes of interpretation common to their ago and nation.
Consequently, witli regard to tlio prophecies brought forward in the
New Testament, we may admit, according to circumstances, with-
out further argument, that they arc frequently interpreted and ap-
plied by tlie evangelists, in a sense which is totally different from
tliat they originally bore.

We have, here in fact a complete table of all tlie four possible
views on tills point: two extreme and two conciliatory; one false
and'one, it is to be liopcd, correct.

1. Oi'thodox view (IIengstcnbcrg and others): Such Old Tes-
tament passages liad in their very origin an exclusive prophetic ref-
erence to Christ, for the New Testament writers so understand them;

and tlicy must be in tlie right even should human reason be con-
founded.

2.  nationalistic view (Paulus and others): Tlic New Testament
writers do not assign a strictly Messianic sense to tlie Old Testament
prophecies, for this reference to Christ is foreign to tlie original sig-
nification of tlicsc prophecies viewed by the liglit of reason ; and tlie
New Testament writinn's must accord witli reason, whatever ancient
beliefs may say to tlic contrary.

3. J\fystical conciliatory view (Olshausen and others): Tlie Old
Testament passages originally embody both the deeper signification
ascribed to them bv tlie New Testament writers, and that more
proximate meaning which common sense obliges us to recognize:

thus sound reason and tlic ancient faith are reconcileable.

4. Decision of criticism: Very many of the Old Testament
prophecies liad, originally, only an immediate reference to events
belonging to tlie time: but they came to be regarded by tlie men oi'
the New Testament as actual predictions of Jesus as tlic Messiah,
.because tlie intelligence of tlicsc men was limited, by the manner of
thinking of their nation, a fact recognized neither by Rationalism
nor tlic ancient faith.*

's The wliole rationalistic interpretation of Scripture rests upon a sufficiently palpable

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

118

Accordingly we shall not hesitate for a moment to allow, in re-
lation to tlie prophecy in question, that the reference to Jesus is ob-
truded upon it by tlie Evangelists. Whether tlie actual birth of
Jesus of a virgin gave rise to this application of the prophecy, or
whether tins prophecy, interpreted beforehand as referring to tlie
Messiah, originated the belief that Jesus was born of a virgin, re-
mains to be determined.

§. 2G. JESUS BEGOTTEN OF THE HOLY GHOST--CRISTICISM OF THE
ORTHODOX OPINION.

THE statement of Matthew and of Luke concerning tlie mode of
Jesus's conception lias, in every age, received the following inter-
pretation by tlie church; that Jesus was conceived in Mary not by
a human father, but by the Holy Ghost, And fc-uly tlie gospel
expressions seem, at first siglit, to justify this interpretation ; since
the words ~^fiv 2) avveX-SKlv ai-ovf (Matth. i. 18.) and KTK'I a'rdpffl ov
Jt.vuoiid) (Luke i. 34.) preclude tlie participation of Joscpli or any
other man in tlie conception of tlie cliild in question. Nevertheless
the terms •nvEv^ia aylov and Svvafuc v-ip'ia-ov do not represent tlie Holy
Ghost in tlie sense of the Church, as tlie third person in the God-
head, but rather the t"^ ""'"i Spii'iias J)id as used in the Old
Testament: God in his agency upon tlie world, and especially upon
man.  In short tlie words t'r yao-pi 'K^ovoa EK TTVSV^CI,-O<; ayiov in
Matthew, and wm\ia aywv i-ne/.evae-cn ml OK K. -. t. in Luke, ex-
press with sufficient clearness that tlie absence of human agency was
supplied-not physically after tlie manner of heathen representa-
tions-but by tlie divine creative energy.

Though tills seems to be tlie representation intended by the evan-
gelists in tlie passages referred to concerning tlie origin of the life
of Jesus, still it cannot be completed witliout considerable difficul-
ties.  We may separate what we may term tlie physico-theological
from tlie liistorical^cxeyetlval difficulties.

The physiological difficulties amount to this, that such a con-
ception would be, a most remarkable deviation from all natural laws.
However obscure tlie physiology of the tact, it is proved by an ex-
ceptionless experience that only by the concurrence of tlie two scxea
is a new human being generated; on which account, Plutarch's re-
mark, "mudtov ovSefzia TTO-K yvvff ^e-ye-at •rroiTjaat 6l^a KotvuvicK;

Tlie New Testament authors are not to be interpreted as if they saiil something irra-
tional (certainly not something contrary to their own modes of thinking),

Now according to a particular interpretation their assertions are irrational (tliat is,

contrary to our modus of thinking).

Consequently tlie interpretation cannot give the original sense, and a dinerent inter-
pretation must be given,

Wlio does not here perceive tile quateraio termiwrum and tlie fatiil inconsequence,

when nationalism takes its stand upon tlie same ground with s-upcrnatiiralisiii; that,
namely, whilst with regard to all other men tile lirst point to be examined is wlietlier they
«ne;il; or write what is .iust'and true, to tlie New Testament "writers the prerogative ia

CONCEPTION OF JESUS-ITS SUPEENATUEAL CIIAEACTEB. 119

ttvdpoc,"* and Cerinthus's "impossihile" become applicable, f It is
only among tlie lowest species of tlie animal kingdom that generation
takes place without tlie union of sexes :^ so tliat regarding tlie matter
purely physiologically, what Origen says, in tlie supranaturalistic
sense, would indeed be true of a man of the like origin; namely,
that tlie words in Ps. xxii, 7, I am a worm and no rnan is a
prophecy of Jesus in tlie above respect.§ But to tlie merely physi-
cal consideration a tlieological one is subjoined by tlie angel (Luke
i. 37.), when he appeals to the divine omnipotence to which nothing is
impossible.  But since the divine omnipotence, bv virtue of its unity
witli divine wisdom, is never exerted in the absence of an adequate
motive, tlie existence of sucli, in the present instance, must be de-
monstrated. But nothing less than an object worthy of the Deity,
and at tlie same time necessarily unattainable except by a deviation
from tlie ordinary course of nature, could constitute a sufficient
cause for tlie suspension by God of a natural law which he had
established.  Only here, it is said, the end, tlie redemption of man-
kind required impeccability on the part of Jesus; and in order to
render him exempt frcin sin, a divinely wrought conception, which
excluded tlie participation of a sinful father, and severed Jesus from
all connexion with original sin, was necessary. || To wliicli it lias
been answered by others,®! (and Schlciermacher has recently most
decisively argued this side of tlie question,**) that the exclusion of
the paternal participation is insufficient, unless, indeed, the inheri-
tance of original sin, on the maternal side, be obviated by tlie adop-
tion of tlie Valentinian assertion, tliat Jesus only passed through
the body of Mary.  But that tlie gospel histories represent an actual
maternal participation is undeniable; consequently a divine inter-
vention which should sanctify tlie participation of tlie sinful human
mother in tlie conception of Jesus must be supposed in order to main-
tain Ills assumed necessary impeccability.  But if God determined
on such a purification of tlie maternal participation, it had been easier
to do tlie same witli respect to tliat of tlie father, than by his total
exclusion, to violate tlie natural law in so unprecedented a manner;

and consequently, a fatherless conception cannot be insisted upon as
the necessary means of compassing tlie impeccability of Jesus.

;   EVCH lie who thinks to escape the difficulties already specified,
by enveloping himself in a supranaturalism, inaccessible to arguments
based on reason 01 the laws of nature, must nevertheless admit tlie
force of tlie exegetwal-Jwtorical difficulties meeting him upon his
own ground, which likewise beset tlie view of tlie supernatural con-
ception of Jesus. Nowhere in the New Testament is such an origin

* Conjugial, prascept. Opp. ed. Hiitten, Vol. 7. S. 428. \ Irenaus adv. haer, 1, 26:

Cerintlius Jesmn suujecit non ex virgine natum, impossibile enim hoc ei visum est. ^ In
Hcrike's neuem Magazin iii. 3, S. 3(;'J. § Homil. in Lucam xiv. Comp. my Streit-
Bchrit'ten i. 2, S. 72 i.

|| Ulshausen liiiil, Comm. S, 49. Neander, L. J. Ch,, S. 1G f.

*\ e. g. by Eichhorn, Einleitung in das N. T. 1. Bd. S. 407.

120 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

ascribed to Jesus, or even distinctly alluded to, except in these two
accounts of Ills infancy in Matthew and in Luke.* The history of
the conccprion is omitted not only by Mark, but also by John, tlie
supposed author of tlie fourth gospel and an alleged inmate with tlic
mother of Jesus subsequent to Ilia death, wlio therefore would liave
been the most accurately informed concerning tliese occurences.  It
is said that John sought rather to record tlie heavenly than tlie earthly
origin of Jcsua ; but tlie question arises, whether tlie doctrine which
he sets forth in his prologue, of a divine hypostasis actually becom-
ing flesh and remaining immanent in Jesus, is rcconcilcable witli the
view given in the passages before us, of a simple divine operation de-
termining the conception of Jesus; whether therefore John could have
presupposed the history of the conception contained in Matthew and
Luke ? This objection, however, loses its conclusive force, if in tlie
progress of our investigation the apostolic origin of tlic fourth gospel
is not established.  The most important consideration therefore is,
that no retrospective allusion to this mode of conception occurs
throughout tlie four gospels; not only neither in John nor in Mark,
but also neither in "Matthew nor in Luke. Not only does Mary
herself designate Joscpli simply as tlie fatlicr of Jesus (Luke ii. 48.),
and the Evangelist speak of both as his parents, yoveic; (Luke ii.
41.),-an appellation which could only have been used in a wider
sense by one who liad just related tlic miraculous conception,-but
all his contemporaries in general, according to our Evangelists, re-
garded him as a son of Joseph, a fact wliicli was not unfrcqucntly
alluded to contemptuously and by way of reproach in his presence
(Matt. xiii. 55; Luke iv. 22 ; John vi. 42.), thus affording him an
opportunity of making a decisive appeal to his miraculous conception,
of wliicli, however, lie says not a single word. Should it, be answered,
tliat lie did not desire to convince respecting tlie divinity of his per-
son by this external evidence, and that he could have no liopc of
making an impression by such means on those wlio were in heart his
opponents,-it must also be remembered, that, according to tlic testi-
mony of the fourth gospel, Ins own disciples, though tlicy admitted
him to be the son of God, still regarded him as tlie actual son of
Joseph. Pliilip introduces Jesus to Nathaniel as the. son of Joseph,
'ITJUOVV -w vim '\vimffi (John i. 46.), manifestly in tlie same sense
of real paternity wliicli tlie Jews attached to tlie designation; and
nowhere is tills represented as an erroneous or imperfect notion wliicli
tliese Apostles liad subsequently to relinquish ; much rather does
the whole sense of the narrative, wliicli is not to be mistaken, ex-
hibit tlie Apostles as having a right belief on this point.  Tlic enig-
matical presupposition, with which, at the marriage in Gana, Mary

,&

view

* This side is particulary considered in der Skiagraphie des Dogma's von Jrsii Iiher-
natiirliclier Geburt, in Sciiimrlt's Bililiotlirk i. 3, S. 400 fi',; in den lii'merkiiiigcn uber
den Olaiibciisiiiinkt: Cliristu.-. i,»t einpf'.inyn voni hcil. Geiat, in Ik'nku's nriiriii Ma;,'.i-
„;.. ;,; •.i "i;-> ir . ;„ K,.i^.-'a liilil. 'i'ln.ul. 1. S. :i31 {,: De Wutlr's Lilil. Duc-mutik,

CONCEPTION OF JESUS-ITS SUPEEXATUEAL CHAEACTEE. 121

addressed herself to Jesus,* is far too vague to prove a recollection
of his miraculous conception on tlie part of tlie mother; at all events
this feature is counterbalanced by the opposing one that tlie family
of Jesus, and, as appears from Matt. xii. 46 ff. compared with Mark
iii. 21 ff., his mother also were, at a later time, in error respecting
Jlis aims ; wliicli is scarcely explicable, even of his brothers, sup-
posing them to have had such recollections.

Just as little as in tlic Gospels, is any tiling in confirmation of
the view of tlie supernatural conception of Jesus, to be found in the
remaining New Testament writings. For when tlic Apostle Paul
speaks of Jesus as made of a woman, yevoi.iEvov (:K yvvainb^ (Gal.
iv. 4.), tills expression is not to be understood as an. exclusion of
partcrnal participation; since tlic addition inade zinder the law,
•ysvofiEvov v-rb v6[iov, clearly allows tliat lie would here indicate (in
tlie form wliicli is frequent in tlie Old and New Testament, for ex-
ample Job xiv. 1; Matt. xi. 11.) human nature with all its condi-
tions. When Paul (Rom. i. 3. 4. compared with ix. 5.) makes
Christ according to the flesh, KaTaadpica, descend from David, but
declares him to be tlic son of God according to the Spirit of Holi-
ness, Kara TTVEV^ICI dywavv^c;; no one will here identify the antithesis
flesh and spirit witli tlie maternal human participation, and tlie di-
vine energy superseding tlic paternal participation in tlic conception of
Jesus.  Finally when in the Epistle to tlic Hebrews (vii. 3.) Mcl-
cinsedec is compared witli the son of God, vw(; -ov OEOV, because
n'ithout father, d-rdrup, tlic application of tlic literally interpreted
d-rdrwp to Jesus, as lie appeared upon earth, is forbidden by tlie
addition without mother dft'q-wfi, wliicli agrees as little witli him as
the immediately following without descent, d~yeveaXoyi]-og.

§ 27. EETEOSPECT OF THE GENEALOGIES.

THE most conclusive excgctical ground of decision against the
supernatural conception of Jesus, which bears more closely on the
point than all tlie hitherto adduced passages, is found in tlie two
genealogies previously considered. Even tlie Manlchaian Faustus
asserted tliat it is impossible witliout contradiction to trace the des-
cent of Jesus from David through Josepli, as is done by our two
genealogists, and yet assume that Josepli was not tlic fatlicr of Jesus;

and Augustine liad nothing convincing to answer when lie remarked
tliat it was necessary, on account of the superior dignity of tlie mas-
culine gender, to carry tlic genealogy of Jesus through" Joseph, who
was Mary's husband if not by a natural by a spiritual alliance, f In
modern times also tlie construction of tlie genealogical tables in
Matthew and in Luke has led many theologians to observe, tliat
these authors considered Jesus as tlie actual son of Joseph, t The

_   * liron^lit to bear upon this point by Neander L. J. Cli., S. 12. Aue-ustinus contra
FaustiimM.inidiaeiiin L. 23. 3. 4. 8. f'See Schmidt, ydileicrmafher, and Wegscheider,

122

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

very design of tlicse tables is to prove Jesus to be of tlie lineage of
David through Joseph ; but what do they prove, if indeed Josepli
was not tlie lather of Jesus ? The assertion tliat Jesus was the son
of David, nof ^av'iS, which in Matthew (i. 1.) prefaces the genealogy
and announces its object, is altogether annulled by tlie subsequent
denial of his conception by means of tlie Davidical Joseph. It is
impossible, therefore, to think it probable tliat the genealogy and
the history of tlie birth of Jesus emanate from tlie same author;*
and we must concur with the theologians previously cited, tliat the
genealogies arc taken from a dincrent source. Scarcely could it sat-
isfy to oppose the remark, tliat as Joseph doubtlessly adopted Jesus,
the genealogical table of tlie former became fully valid for tlie latter.
Eor adoption might indeed suffice to secure to the adopted son tho
reversion of certain external family rights and inheritances; but
such a relationship could in no wise lend a claim to tlie Messianic
dignity, which was attached to tlie true blood and lineage of David.
lie, therefore, wlio liad regarded Joseph as nothing more than tlie
adopted father of Jesus, would hardly liave given himself the trouble
to seek out tlie Davidical descent of Josepli; but if indeed, besides
tlie cstablislied belief that Jesns was tlie son of Crod, it still remained
important to represent him as tlie son of David, tlie pedigree of Mary
would have been preferred tor this purpose ; for, however contrary to
custom, tlie maternal genealogy must have been admitted in a case
where a human father did not exist. Least of all i.s it to be be-
lieved, that several authors would have engaged in tlie compilation
of a genealogical table for Jesus which traced his descent through.

0                 0                                                                                                                                                0

Joseph, so tliat two different genealogies of this kind are still pre-
served to us, if a closer relationship between Jesua and Joseph had
not been admitted at tlie time of their composition.

Conseduently, tlie decision of the learned theologians who agree
that these genealogies were composed in tlie belief tliat Jesus was
the actual son of Josepli and Mary, can hardly be disputed; but
the authors or compilers of our gospels, notwithstanding their own
conviction of the divine origin of Jesus, received them among their
materials; only tliat Mattliew (i. 1G.) changed the original Joseph
begat Jesus of Mary-'IMO/)^) de ly&vvrjOE ~bv '\i]<5mv KK. -;yc ^ii.piag
(comp. verses 3. 5. (i.) according to his own view; and so likewise
Luke (iii. 23.) instead of commencing his genealogy simply with,
Jesus-tlie son of Jw:-p!t-'\i]awc; v'wc; 'Iw!^, inserts being as w(is

Supposed^ UV, d)(; KVOfU^KTO K. T. /L.

Let it not be objected that tlie view for which ~WQ contend,
namely, tliat the genealogies could not have been composed under
tlie notion tliat Josepli was not tlie father of Jesus, leaves no con-
ceivable motive for incorporating them into our present gospels. Tlie
original construction of a genealogy of Jesus, even though in tlie case
before us is consisted simply in tlie adapting' of foreign already cx-

* F.iiilihorn thinks this probable, Einl. in (las N. T, i. S. 425, De Wette possible,

COXCEPTIOX OF JESL'S-ITS SLTEEX.VTURAL CIIAEACTEE. 123

isting genealogical tables to Jesus, required a powerful and direct
inducement: this was the hope thereby to gain-the corporeal de-
scent of Jesus from Joseph being presupposed- a main support to
the belief in his Messiahship ; whilst, on tlie other hand, a less pow-
erful inducement was sufficient to incite to tlie admission of tlie pre-
viously constructed genealogies : the expectation tliat, notwithstand-
ing the non-existence of any real relationship between Josepli and
Jesus, they might nevertheless serve to link Jesus to David. Thus
we find, tliat in the histories of the birth botli in Mattliew and in Luke,
tliougli tlicy cadi decidedly exclude Joseph from the conception, great
stress is laid upon the Davidical descent of Joseph (M-att. i. 20, Luke
i. 27, ii. 4); tliat which in fact Lad no'real significance, except in
connexion with tlie earlier opinion, is retained even after the point
of view is changed.

Since, in this way, we discover both the genealogies to be me-
morials belonging to tlie time and circle of tlie primitive church, in
which Jesus was still regarded as a naturally begotten man, the sect
of tlie Ebionites cannot fail to occur to us ; as we are told concern-
ing them, tliat they held this view of the person of Christ at this
early period * We should therefore liave expected, more especially,
to have found tlicse genealogies in the old Ebionitish gospels, of
which we liave still knowledge, and arc not a little surprised to learn
that precisely in tlicse gospels tlie genealogies were wanting.  It is
true Epiphanius states that tlie gospel of tlie Ebionites commenced
witli tlie public appearance of tlie Baptist; f accordingly, by the
genealogies, y&wa/loyfaic, wliicli tlicy are said to have cut away,
might liave been meant, tliosc histories of tlie birth and infancy
comprised in tlie two first chapters of Matthew; wliicli tlicy could
not liave adopted in their present form, since they contained tlie fa-
therless conception of Jesus, wliicli was denied by the Ebionites:

genealogies,
might liave

and it might also have been conjectured that tills section which was
in opposition to their system had alone perhaps been wanting in tlicir
gospel; and tliat tlie genealogy wliieli was in harmony with tlieir
view might nevertheless liave been somewhere inserted.  But tills
supposition vanishes as soon as we find that Epiphanius in reference
to the Nazarcncs, defines the genealogies, (of wliicli he is ignorant
whether tlicy possessed them or not, as reachiizg from Abraham
to CVt/'isf, Ta<; aTo TOV'A.[3paw we; Xpi.<J-ov;^ consequently by the
genealogies which were wanting to some heretics, he evidently un-
derstood tlie genealogical tables, though, in relation to the Ebionites,
he might likewise liave included under this expression the history of
tlie birth.

How is tlie strange phenomenon, tliat these genealogies are not

p             -i                                                     0      -L                                        '                                         00

loiinit among tliat very sect of Christians wdio retained tlie particu-
lar opinion upon wliicli they were constructed, to be explained ? A
modern investigator lias advanced tlie supposition, tliat the Jcwish-

^Jnstin. Mart, Dial, cum Tryphone, 48; Orignes contra CelsumL. 5, 51, Euseb,

124

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

Christians omitted the genealogical tables from prudential motives,
in order not to facilitate or augment the persecution which, under
Domitian, and perhaps even earlier, threatened the family of David.*
But explanations, having no inherent connexion with the subject,
derived from circumstances in them selves of doubtful historical va-
lidity, are admissible only as a last refuge, when no possible solu-
tion of the questionable phenomenon is to be found in tlie thing
itself, as here in tlie principles of tlie Ebionitish system.

But in tills case the matter is by no means so difficult. It is
known that tlie Fathers speak of two classes of Ebionites, of which
tlie one, besides strenuously maintaining the obligation of tlie Mo-
saic law, lield Jesus to be tlie naturally begotten Son of Joseph and
Marv; the other, from that time called also Nazarcncs, admitted
witli the orthodox church tlie conception by tlie Holy Ghost.f But
besides this distinction there existed yet another.  Tlie most an-
cient ecclesiastic writers, Justin Martyr and Irenanis for example,
are acquainted with tliose Ebionites only, who regarded Jesus as a
naturally born man first endowed with divine powers at his baptism. ^
In Epiphanius and tlie Clementine Homilies, on the other liand, we
meet with Ebionites wlio liad imbibed an element of speculative
-Gnosticism.  This tendency, which according to Epiphanius is to
be dated from one Elxai, has been ascribed to Esscnic intlucncc,§
and traces of tlie same have been discovered in the heresies referred
to in tlie Epistle to tlie Colossians; whereas the first class of Ebion-
ites evidently proceeded from Common Judaism. Which form of
opinion was the earlier and which tlie later developed is not so
easily determined; witli reference to the last detailed difference, it
might seem, since tlie speculative Ebionites arc mentioned first by
tlie Clementines and Epiphanius, wliilst Ebionites holding a simpler
view are spoken of by Justin and by IreiiEcus, that tlie latter were
tlie earlier; nevertheless as Tertullian already notices in his time
the Gnosticising tendency of the opinions of tlie Ebionites respect-
ing Christ, 1| and as tlie germ of such views existed among the Es-
scnes in tlie time of Jesus, the more probable assumption is, tliat
both opinions arose side by side about the same period. IT As little
can it be proved witli regard to the other difference, that the views
concerning Christ held by the Nazarencs became first, at a later
period, lowered to tliose of tlie Ebionites ;'''* since tlie notices, partly
confused and partly of late date, of tlie ecclesiastical waiters, may
be naturally explained as arising out of what may be called an opti-
cal delusion of tlie church, which,-wliilst slie in fact made con-

* Credner, in (k'n Pn'itragen zur Einleitung in das N. T. 1, S. 443. A.nm.  ^ Orig.
lit sup,  ^ !Sec NraiKk'r, K. G. 1; 2, S. G15 f. § Credner, liber Essener und Eliionifen
mid cinen theilwrisen Kusaninieiihaiig beider. in Winer's Zeitschrit't f. wissunsuliat'tlirhe
Theologie, 1. Bd. ^itcs uinl 3tes Keft; sec nailer, Frof/i: de Ebzonltarain orif/itie t'f doclritia
ab A'.s,5(-«^ repftfiidit, und christl. Gnosis, S. 4U3.  || De carne Christi, c. 14 : 1'olerif- h(ec
opinio coiH'euii'e, qui ntidit,in honwtcm, e; tanf/nn ex yemme David, i. e. noil et Dei jilium,
cwistilult Jv.-ncit, ut i/z illo anyl/im J'u'ifse niiratt  ^J Iseandcr and Schneckcnburg.'r are
^ tlii- l,itti.r dicaeler and Crednrr of tlie former opinion.  ** I here refer to til" account

CONCEPTION Of JESUS-IT8 SUPERNATURAL CHARACTER. 125

tinual advances in the glorification of Christ, but a part of the
Jewish Christians remained stationary,-made it appear to her as
if she herself remained stationary, wliilst the others fell back into

heresy.                               :   •

By thus distinguishing tlie simple and the speculative Ebion-
ites, so much is gained, that tlie failure of tlie genealogies among
the latter class, mentioned by Epiphanius, docs not prove them to
have been also wanting among tlie former.   And the less if we
should be able to make it appear probable, that tlie grounds of their
aversion to the genealogical table, and the grounds of distinction
between them and tlie other class of Ebionites, were identical. One
of tliese grounds was evidently the unfavourable opinion, which the
Ebionites of Epiphanius and of tlie Clementine Homilies liad of
David, from whom tlie genealogy traces tlie descent of Jesus. It
is well known tliat they distinguished in tlie Old Testament a two-
fold prophecy, male and female, pure and impure, of which the
former only promised tilings heavenly and true, tlie latter things
earthly and delusive; that proceeding from Adam and Abel, this
from Eve and Cain; and both constituted and under current through
the wliole history of the revelation." It was only the pious men
from Adam to Joshua whom they acknowledged as true prophets:

the later prophets and men of God, among whom David and Solo-
mon are named, were not only not recognized, but abhorred, f We
even find positive indications tliat David was an object of their par-
ticular aversion. There were many tilings which created in them
a detestation of David (and Solomon). David was a bloody warrior;

but to slied blood -was, according to the doctrines of these Ebion-
ites, oue of tlie greatest of sins; David w^s known to have com-
mitted adultery, (Solomon to have been a voluptuary); and adultery
was even more detested by this sect than murder. David was a
performer on stringed instruments; tills art, the invention of the
Canaanites (Gen. iv. 21.), was held by these Ebionites to be a sign
of false prophecy; finally, tlie prophecies announced by David and
those connected with him, (and Solomon,) ha'd reference to the king-
doms of this world, of which tlie Gnosticising Ebionites desired to
know notliing4 Now the Ebionites who had sprung from common
Judaism could not have shared this ground of aversion to the gen-
ealogies; since to i the orthodox Jew David was an object of the
highest veneration.

Concerning a second point the notices are not so lucid and ac-
cordant as they should be; namely, whether it was a further de-
velopment of the general Ebionitish doctrine concerning tlie person

•*• Hornil. 3, 23-37. f Epiphan. haeres, 30, 18. comp. 15, }: That these were the
traits in David^s character, which displeased the Christian sect in question, is sufficiently
evident from a passage in the Clementine Homilies, though, the name is not given ; Homil»
3, 25 : en p)v Kal ol UTTO TI/C TOVTOV (rpfi Kuiv) dtadoy/c irpoeAtf^ufforef Tpuroi. fioi^ol £}f-
VOVTO, Kal ifia'^TfJpia, nai ncSupal, Hat ^aAxcif oTrAor Trof.efieim.iv k'/ivavTo. Ai 6 nai ^ r£n-
£Yy6vuv Trpo^y/rfta, uoi^uv aal TJ/a^rTfpluv yiuovaa^ ^•a.v'Qa.vovTfJf; 6iu ~L}T ^SvTTa^Eiuv u^ TOI'S

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

126

of the Christ, which led. these Ebionites to reject tlie genealogies.
According to Epiphanius, they •fully rccognizecl tlie Gnostic distinc-
tion between Jesus the son of Joscpli and Mary, and tlie Christ
who descended upon him ;'" and consequently miglit have been with-
held from referring tlie genealogy to Jesus only perhaps by their
abhorrence of David.  On tlie other liand, from tlie wliole tenor of
tlie Clementines, and from one passage in particular,! it lias recent-
ly been inferred, and not without apparent reason, tliat the author
of tlicse writings had himself abandoned the view of a natural con-
ception, and even birth of Jesus ; ^ whereby it is yet more manifest
that tlie ground of the rejection of the genealogies by tills sect was
peculiar to it, and not common to tlie oilier Ebionites.

Moreover positive indications, that the Ebionites wlio proceeded
from Judaism possessed the genealogies, do not entirely fail. Whilst
the Ebionites of Epiphanius and of the Clementines called Jesus
only Son of God, but rejected tlie appellation Son of David, as be-
longing to tlie common opinion of tlie Jews; § other Ebionites were
censured by tlie Fathers for recognizing Jesus only as tlie Son of
David, to whom he is traced in the genealogies, and not likewise
as tlie Son of Grod. || Further, Epiphanius relates of tlie earliest
Judaising G-nostics Ccrinthus and Carpocrates, that theY used a
gospel tlie same in other respects indeed as tlie Ebionites, but that
they adduced tlie genealogies, which they therefore read in the
same, in attestation of the human conception of Jesus by Joseph.*!
Also tlie dTTc>iwr]iJ,oveviJ,a-a cited by Justin, and which originated upon
JudaM-christian ground, appear to have contained a genealogy simi-
lar to that in our Matthew; since Justin as well as Mattliew speaks,
in relation to Jesus, of a yevoi; -rov i\aftl6 K.OA. 'A,3pa£Ut, of a (JTEpf.ia f^
'Icu£G);3, S'LO, 'lov6a, K.al <I>ape^ sal 'leava'i nw, Aa;31d na-ep^ofiEvov ;** only
that at tlie time, and in the circle of Justin, tlie opinion of a super-
natural conception of Jesus had already suggested tlie reference of

the genealogy to Mary, instead of to Josepli.

Hence it appears that we have in tlie genealogies a memorial,
agreeing with indications from other sources, of the fact that in the
very earliest Christian age, in Palestine, a body of Christians, nu-
merous enough to establish upon distinct fundamental opinions two
different Messianic tables of descent, considered Jesus to have been
a naturally conceived human being. And no proof is furnished to
us in tlie apostolic writings, that the Apostles would have declared

* Epiphan, IIaer, 30, 14. 16. 34,  f IIomil, 3, 17, t Sclmeckenburger, iilier das
Evangelium der Aegypter, S. 7; Bauer, christlk'hc Gnosis, S. 7ti0 ft'.  See on tlie other
side Crcdner und IIott'niann. § Orig. Comm. in Matth. T. 16. 13. Tertullian, 1)^ carne
Christi, 14, S. Amn. 13 (a passage in which indeed the speculative and ordinary Ehion-
ites are mingled together). || Clement, homil. IS, 13. They referred the words of Mattli.
xi. 27 : ovSc'i^ ?yvu rov irarcpa, el fiff 6 vlAc t. T. 'k. to rat's naTEpa vop.i!,ovTaf Xpiarov rOv
^aptS, Kal auTov (^ rov ^pc-^rov vlov ovra^ /cat vlov 'Oeov f^ e^i-'u/vorar, and cumplaiiu-d that
alri TOV •Scov rov Aa,3«i vu.vrc.i; c^eyov. ^ Hacres, 30, 14-: o ft'sv yup V.i/pivf)o(; Kal Kap-
TTOKpaf TU avT(-> ;t'p6/2fi'cii irap' avTOlf; (TO(C 'E/3iui-'aioif) cva-y-fellu, UTTO rf/s ap.vc TOU KarH

"   /    ^  i-..--. _..„,.„„,, ^ n^rit)nnrcir 'l(.)(T7'/ffl KO.I Ma-

CONCEPTION OF JESUS-ITS SUPERNATURAL CHARACTER. 127

this doctrine to be unchristian: it appeared so first from the point
of view adopted by the authors of the histories of the birth in the
first and third Gospels: notwithstanding which however, it is treated
with surprising lenity by the Fathers of tlie church.

§ 28. NATURAL EXPLANATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE CONCEPTION.

IF, as appears from the foregoing statements, so many weighty
difficulties, philosophical as well as exegetical, beset the supranatura-
listic explanation, it is well worth while to examine whether it be
not possible to give an interpretation of the gospel history which
shall obviate these objections. Recourse lias been had to tlie natural
explanation, and tlie two narratives singly and coniointly have been
successively subjected to the rationalistic mode of interpretation.

In the first place, tlie account in Matthew seemed susceptible
of sucli an interpretation. Numerous rabbinical passages were cited
to demonstrate, tliat it was consonant witli Jewish notions to con-
sider a son of pious parents to be conceived by the divine co-opera-
tion, and tliat he should be called the son of tlie Holy Spirit,
without its being ever imagined that paternal participation was
thereby excluded. It was consequently contended, that tlie section
in Matthew represented merely the intention of tlie angel to inform
Joseph, not indeed tliat Mary had become pregnant in the absence
of all human intercourse, but that notwithstanding her pregnancy
she was to be regarded as pure, not as one fallen from virtue. It
was maintained that the exclusion of paternal participation-which
is an embellishment of the original representation-occurs first in
Luke in the words dviSpa ov ywuaub) (i. 34.)'" When however tills
view was justly opposed by the remark, tliat the expression Trp'iv ^
ovve.\Q€w dv-ova in Matthew (i. 18) decidedly excludes tlie partici-
pation of the only individual in question, namely Joseph; it was
then thought possible to prove that even in Luke the paternal ex-
clusion was not so positive: but truly this could be done only by
an unexegetical subversion of'the clear sense of the words, or else
by uncritically tin-owing suspicion on a part of a well-connected nar-
rative. The first expedient is to interpret Mary's inquiry of tlie
angel i. 34, thus: Can I who am already betrothed and married give
birth to tlie Messiah, for as tlie mother of tlie Messiah I must have
no husband? whereupon the angel replies, tliat God, through his
power, could make something distinguished even of the cliild con-
ceived of her and Joseph.f The other proceeding is no less arbi-
trary. Mary's inquiry of the angel is explained as an unnatural
interruption of his communication, which being abstracted, the pas-

* Br . . ., die Nachricht, dass Jesus durch den heil. Gcist und von einer Jungfrau
geboten sci, aus Zcitbegrift'en eriautert. In Schmidt's Bibl. 1, 1. S. 101 ft'.-Horst, in
Henkc's Museum 1, 4, 497 ft'., uber die beiden ersten Kapitel in Evang. Lukas.   f Be-
nierkungen iibcr den Glaubcnspunkt: Christus ist empt'angen vom heil. Geist. In Henke's

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

128

sage is found to contain no decided ihtimation of the su.pematu.ral

conception.*

It" consequently, the difficulty of the natural explanation of the

two accounts be equally great, still, with respect to both it must be
alike attempted or rejected; and for the consistent Rationalist, a
Paulus for example, tlic latter is tlie only course. Tins commentator
considers the participation of Josepli indeed excluded by Matt. i. 18,
but by no means that of every oilier man ; neither can lie find a su-
pernatural divine intervention in tlie expression of Luke i. 35. The.
JIoly Ghost ~rvEvT]a aytov is not with him objective, an external
influence operating upon Mary, but her own pious imagination. Tlie
power of the Highest-Swap.^ v^iarov is not tlie immediate divine
omnipotence, but everv natural power employed in a manner pleasing
to God may be so called. Consequently, according to Paulus, the
meaning of tlic angelic announcement is simply tills: prior to her
union with Joseph, Mary, under the influence of a pure enthusiasm
in sacred things on tlie one hand, and by a human co-operation
pleasing to God on the other, became the mother of a cliild who on
account of tills holy origin was to be called a son of God.

Let us examine rather more accurately the view which this
representative of rationalistic interpretation takes of tlie particulars
of the conception of Jesus. He begins with Elizabetli, tlie patriotic
and wise daughter of Aaron, as he styles her.  She, having con-
ceived the hope that slie might give birth to one of God's prophets,
naturally desired moreover that he might be the first of prophets,
the forerunner of the Messiah; and that the latter also might speedily
be bom. Now there was among lier own kinsfolk a person suited
in every respect for the mother of the Messiah, Mary, a young vir-
gin, a descendant of David; nothing more was needful than to inspire
her likewise with such a special hope. Whilst these intimations
prepare us to anticipate a cleverly concerted plan on the part of
Elizabeth in reference to her young relative, in which we hope to
become initiated; Paulus here suddenly lets fall tlie curtain, and
remarks, that the exact manner in which Mary was convinced that
she should become the mother of the Messiah must be left histori-
cally undetermined; thus much only is certain, that Mary remained
pure, for slic could not with a clear conscience have stationed her-
self, as she afterwards did, under tlie Cross of her Son, had slie felt
that a reproach rested on her concerning the origin of the hopes she
had entertained of him. The following is the only hint subsequently
given of the particular view held by Paulus. It is probable, he
thinks, that the angelic messenger visited Mary in the evening or
even at night; indeed according to tlie correct reading of Luke i. 28,
which has not the word angel, ical elae^Ouv Trpbg MTTJV elwe, without
6 cy-yg/loc, the evangelist here speaks only of some one who had
come in. (As if in this case, the participle elae^Ow must not ncces-
---.-----'i i..,.T-5/.. m. in the absence of tlic pronoun be

CONCEPTION OF JESUS-ITS SUPERNATURAL CHARACTER. . 12!)

referred to the subject, the angel Gabriel-6 ayyeXw; Taftpi^X, v. 26.!)
Paulus adds: tliat this visitant was the angel Gabriel was the suli-
sequcnt suggestion of Mary's own mind, after slic had lieard of the

vision of Zacharias.

G abler in a review of Paulus's Commentary* lias fully exposed.
•with commensurate plainness of speech, tlie transaction which lies
concealed under tins explanation. It is impossible, says lie, to im-
agine any other interpretation of Paulus's view than tliat some one
passed himself off for the angel Gabriel, and as tlic pretended Mes-
senger of God remained witli Mary in order that slie might become
the mother of tlic Messiah. What! asks Gabler, Is Mary, at tlie
very time slic is betrothed, to become pregnant by another and is
tills to be called an innocent holy action, pleasing to God and irrc-
prochable ? Mary is here pourtrayed as a pious visionary, and tlie
pretended messenger of heaven as a deceiver, or lie too is a gross
fanatic.  Tlic reviewer most justly considers such an assertion as
revolting, if contemplated from tlie Christian point of view7; if from
the scientific, as at variance, both with the principles of interpreta-
tion and of criticism.

Tlie author of the "Natural Plistory of the Great Prophet of
Nazareth" is, in flits instance, to be considered as tlie most worthy
interpreter of Paulus; for though tlie former could not, in tills part
of his work, have made use of Paulus's Commentary, yet, in ex-
actly tlie same spirit, he unreservedly avows wliat tlie latter care-
fully veils. He brings into comparison a story in Josephus,f ac-
cording to which, in the very time of Jesus, a Roman knight won
the chaste wife of a Roman noble to his wishes, by causing her to be
invited by a priest of Isis into the temple of the Godde'-s, under the
pretext tliat tlie god Anubis desired to embrace her. In innocence
and faith, the woman resigned herself, and would perhaps afterwards
have believed slie had given birth to the cliild of a god, liad not the
intriguer, witli bitter scorn, soon after discovered to her the true
state of tlie case. It is the opinion of tlie author tliat M.ary, tlic
betrothed bride of the aged Josepli, was in like manner deceived by
some amorous and fanatic young man (in the sequel to tlie history
lie represents liirn to be Joseph of Arimathea), and that she on her
part, in perfect innocence, continued to deceive others.:): It is evi-
dent that this interpretation does not differ from tlie ancient Jewisli
blasphemy, which we find in Celsus and in the Talmud; that Jesus
falsely represented himself as born of a pure virgin, whereas, in fact,
he was tlie offspring of the adultery of Mary with a certain Panthera.§

This wliole view, of which the culminating point is in the cal-

* Im neuesten tlieol. Journal 7. Bd. 4.. St. 8. 407 {. f Antiq. xviii. 3, 4. ^ Iter
Thei], S. 140 ft'. § The legend lias undergone various modifications, Lut tlie name of
Puntlttra or Pandira has been uniformly retained. Vid. Origenes c. Cris. 1, 28. 32.
Scliott^eii, Horas 2, (;93 ff, aus Tract., Sanhedrin u. A,; Eisenmenger, entdf-cktes Juden-
thum, 1, S. 10.') ft, aus der Sehmilhsclirift: Toledoth Jesehu; Thilo, cod. apocr. S. 528.
Comp. my Alihandlung tibcr die Namen Panther, Panthcras, Pandera, in judischen und

THE LIFE OP JESUS.

130

iimny of the Jews, cannot be Letter judged than in the words of
Origen. If, says tills author, they wished to substitute something
else in tlic place of tlic liistory of the supernatural conception of
Jesus, they should at any rate have made it happen in a more prob-
able manner; they ought not, as it were against tlieir "will, to admit
tliat Mary knew not Josepli, but they might have denied this feat-
ure, and yet have allowed Jesus to have been born of an ordinary
human marriage: whereas, tlie forced and extravagant character of

0   '                 '                                           c5

tlieir hypothesis betrays its falsehood.* Is not flits as much as to
say, that if once some particular features o.f a marvellous narrative
arc doubted, it is inconsequent to allow7 others to remain unques-
tioned ? eacli part of such an account ought to be subjected to criti-
cal examination.  Tlic correct view of the narrative before us is to
be found, tliat is indirectly, in Origen. For wlien at one time he
places togctlier, as of tlic same kind, tlie miraculous conception of
Jesus and the story of Plato's conception by Apollo (though here,
indeed, tlic meaning is tliat only ill-disposed persons could doubt such
tilings f), and when at another time lie savs of the story concerning
Plato, that it belongs to tliosc mythi by which it was sought to ex-
hibit tlie distinguished wisdom and power of great men (but here
lie does not include tlic narrative of Jesus's conception), lie in fact
states tlie two premises, namely, tlie similarity of the two narratives
and tlie mythical character of the one ;t from which the inference of
the merely mythical worth of tlic narrative of tlie conception of
Jesus follows; a conclusion wliicli can never indeed have occurred

to his own mind.

§ 29. HISTORY OF THE CONCEPTION OF JESUS VIEWED AS A MYTIIUS.

IF, says Gabler in his review of the Commentary of Paulus, we
must relinquish tlie supernatural origin of Jesus, in order to escape
the ridicule of our contemporaries, and if, on the oilier hand, the
natural explanation leads to conclusions not only extravagant, but
revolting; tlie adoption of the mytlius, by which all tliesc difficul-
ties arc obviated, is to be preferred. In tlic world of mythology
many great men had extraordinary births, and were sons of tlie gods.
Jesus himself spoke of his heavenly origin, and called God his fa-
ther ; besides, his title as Messiah was-Son of God. From Mat-
thew i. 22., it is further evident that the passage of Isaiah, vii. 14.
was referred to Jesus by the early Christian Church. In conformity
with tills passage the belief prevailed that, Jesus, as tlie Messiah,
should be born of a virgin by means of divine agency ; it was there-
fore taken for granted tliat wliat was to be actually did occur; and
thus originated a pliilosopliical (dogmatical) mytlius concerning tlie
birth of Jesus. But according to historical truth, Jesus was tlie
offspring of an ordinary marriage, between Joseph and Mary; an

CONCEPTION OF JESUS-ITS SUPEENATUEAL CHARACTER. 131

explanation which, it has been justly remarked, maintains at once
tlie dignity of Jesus and tlic respect due to his mother."*

The pronencss of tlic ancient world to represent the great men
and benefactors of tlieir race as the sons of tlie gods, lias therefore
been referred to, in order to explain tlic origin of such a mytlius.
Our theologians have accumulated examples from tlie Greco-Roman
mythology and history. They have cited Hercules, and tlic Di-
oscuri; Romulus, and Alexander; but above all Pythagoras,! and
Plato. Of the latter philosopher Jerome speaks in a manner quite
applicable to Jesus : sapientia' principem non ahtcr arbitrantur, nisi
de partu virginis editum.^:

From these examples it misrht have been inferred tliat the nar-
ratives of tlie supernatural conception liad possibly orglnated in a
similar tendency, and had no foundation in liistory. Here Iiowevci
tlie orthodox and tlic rationalists arc unanimous in denying, though
indeed upon different grounds, the, validity of tlie analogy. Origen,
from a perception of tlie identical character of the two classes of
narratives, is not far from regarding tlie heathen legends of the sons
of tlie, gods as true supernatural histories.  Paulus on Ills side is
more decided, and is so logical as to explain botli classes of narra-
tives in tin; same manner, as natural, but still as true histories. At
least lie says of tlic narrative concerning Plato: it cannot be affirmed
that tlie groundwork of tlie liistory was a subsequent creation ; it is
far more probable tliat Perictionc believed herself to be pregnant by
one of her gods. Tlie. fact that her son became a Plato might indeed
have served to confirm that belief, but not to have originated it.
Tholuck invites attention to the important distinction that tlie mythi
concerning Romulus and others were formed many centuries after
tlie lifetime of these men: tlie mythi concerning Jesus, on the con-
trary, must have existed shortly after Ills death. § He cleverly fails
to remember tlie narrative of Plato's birth, since he is well aware
tliat precisely in tliat particular, it is a dangerous point.  Oaiander
however approaches tlie subject with much patlios, and affirms that
Plato's apotlieosis as son of Apollo did not exist till several centuries
after him: [] whereas in fact Plato's sister's son speaks of it as a pre-
vailing legend in Athens. I Olshauscn, with whom Neander coin-
cides, refuses to draw any detrimental inference from this analogy of
the mythical sons of tlie gods; remarking tliat though these narra-
tives are unhistorical, they evince a general anticipation and desire

* Gabler, in seinem neucsten theol. Journal, 7, 3. S. 408 f; Eichhorn, Einleit. in
das N. T. 1, S. 428 f; Bauer, hebr. Mythol, 1, 192 e. fl'; Kaiser, bibl. Theologie, 1,
i". 231 f; Weg?choider, Inatit. § 123; Ue Wette, bibl. Doginat, § 281, und exeg. Hand-
•"lA 1, 1, S. 18 f; Ammoii, Fortbildung des Christenth. S. 201 ft'; Hase, L. J. § 33;

Fritzaclie, Comment, in Matth. S. .">(;.  Tlie latter justly remarks in tlie title to the first
chapter: nun milus ille, (Jesus) lib J'vrimt dactorum Jiuiaicorum de Messia sententice,
pairem fiabet spiritum divliium, mutrein rtryiiiem.   •)• Jamblicli, vita Pythagoras, cap, 2,
Ml. Ku.ssling.   t Adv. Jovin. 1, 2(i.  Diog. Lacrt, 3, 1, 2.  § Glaubwiirdigkeit S. 64,
|| Apologie des L. .1. S. 1>2, ^ Diog. Lacrt. a, a, 0.: 2"rfi'ffi7r7TOf (Sororis Pintunis jilius,.
Hit-ron,) if iv TU e7r^/pa^if/[i£V(fi n?,uT(JVf)C TT^pSEiTrvu K-al K'^ap^oc £V TO II^arfJVos' EryKU-

132

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

of such a fact, and therefore guarantee its reality, at least in one
historical manifestation. Certainly, a general anticipation and re-
presentation must have truth for its basis; Tout tlie truth does not
consist in any one individual fact, presenting an accurate correspond-
ence with tliat notion, Lut in an idea which realizes itself in a se-
ries of facts, which often bear no resemblance to the general notion.
The widely spread notion of a golden age does not prove tlie exist-
ence of a golden age: so the notion of divine conceptions does not
prove that some one individual was thus produced.   The truth
which is tlie basis of this notion is something quite different.

A more essential objection* to tlie analogy is, that. the represen-
tations of tlie heathen world prove nothing with respect to tlie is-
olated Jews; and that tlie idea of sons of the gods, belonging to
polytheism, could not have exerted an influence on tlie rigidly mon-
otheistic notion of the Messiah. At all events sucli an inference
must not be too hastily drawn from the expression "sons of God,''
found likewise among the Jews, w-liicli as applied in tlie Old Testa-
ment to magistrates, (Ps. Ixxxii. 6., or to theocratic kings, 2 8am.
vii. 14, Ps. ii. 7.), indicates only a theocratic, and not a physical or
metaphysical relation.  Still less is importance to be attaclied to tlie
language of flattery used by a Roman, in Joscphus, who calls beau-
tiful children of the Jewisli princes children of God.f It was, how-
ever, a notion among tlie Jews, as was remarked in a former section,
tliat the Holy Spirit co-operated in tlie conception of pious individ-
uals; moreover, tliat God's choicest instruments were conceived by
divine assistance of parents, wlio could not liave liad a cluld accord-
ing to the natural course of tilings. And if, according to tlie be-
lieved representation, the extinct capability on both sides was re-
newed by divine intervention (Rom. iv. 19.), it was only one step
further to tlie belief that in the case of the conception of tlie most
distinguished of all God's agents, the Messiah, tlie total absence of
participation on the one side was compensated by a more complete
super-added capability on the other. Tlie latter is scarcely" a degree
more marvellous than the former. And thus must it have appeared
to the autlior of Luke i., since lie dissipates Mary's doubts by the
same reply with which Jehovah repelled Sara's incredulity. :j: Nei-
ther the Jewish reverence for marriage, nor tlie prevalent represen-
tation of tlio Mcssiali as a human being, could prevent the advance
to this climax; to which, on the other hand, tlie ascetic estimation
of celibacy, and the idea, derived from Daniel, of the Christ as a
superhuman being, contributed. But decided impulse to tlie de-
velopment of the representations embodied in our histories of the
birth, consisted partly in tlie title, iSon of God, at one time usually
given to the Messiah. For it is the nature of such originally figu-
rative expressions, after a wliile to come to be interpreted according

* Ncander, L. J. Cli. 8. 10.  f Ant- 10' 2- 6"

CONCEPTION OF JESL-S-ITS SUPERNATURAL CHARACTER. 133

to their more precise and literal signification; and it was a daily

occurrence, especially among tlie later Jews, to attacli a sensible,
signification to that which originally had merely a spiritual or fif'u-
rativc meaning.  Tills natural disposition to understand the Messi-
anic title Son of God more and more literally, was fostered by the
expression in tlie Psalms (ii. 7.), interpreted of tlie Messiah: Thou
art my son ; this day have I begotten thee : words which can
scarcely fail to suggest a physical relation; it was also nurtured by
the prophecy of Isaiah respecting the virgin wlio should be with
cliild, which it appears was applied to tlie Messiali; as were so
many other prophecies of which the immediate signification liad be-
come obscure. Tills application may be seen in tlie Greek word
chosen by tlie Scptuagint, -na^iOivw;, a pure unspotted virgin, whereas
by Aquila and other Greek translators tlie word veavi(; is used.*
Tims did tlie notions of a son of (rod and a son of a virgin com-
plete one another, till at last the divine agency was substituted for
human paternal participation. Wctstcin indeed affirms tliat no Jew
ever applied tlie prophecy of Isaiah to tlie Messiali; and it was with
extreme labour that Schoett^en collected traces of the notion that
the Messiali should be tlie son of a virgin from the Rabbinical writ-
ings. Tills however, considering tlie paucity of records of tlie Mi's-
sianic ideas of tliat age,f proves notliing in opposition to the pre-
sumption tliat a notion tlien prevailed, of which we have the ground-
work in tlie Old Testament, and an inference hardly to be mistaken
in the New.

One objection yet remains, which I can no longer designate as
peculiar to Olshauscn, since other theoloa'iana have shown them-
selves solicitous of sharing the fame.  Tlie objection is, that. the
mythical interpretation of tlie gospel narrative is especially danger-
ous, it being only too well fitted to engender, obscurely indeed, pro-
ianc and blasphemous notions concerning tlie origin of Jesus ; since
it cannot fail to favour an opinion destructive of tlie belief in a Re-
deemer,-namely, tliat Jesus came into being through unholy means;

since, in fact, at tlie time of licr pregnancy Mary was not marricd.t
In Olshauscn's first edition of his work, he adds tliat lie willingly
allows tliat these interpreters know not wdiat they do: it is there-
fore hut just to give linn tlie advantage of the same concession, since
lie certainly appears not to know what mythical interpretation means.
How otherwise would lie say, tliat tlie mythical interpretation is fit-
ted only to favour a blasphemous opinion; therefore that all wlio
understand thenarrative mytliically, are disposed to commit tlie
absurdity with which Origcn reproaches the Jewisli calumniators;

the retaining one solitary incident, namely, that Mary was not mar-
ried, whilst tlie remainder of the narrative is held to be unhistori-
cal; a particular incident wliicli evidently serves only as a support

* 1)].: Wi'tto, Exg, HaiiiHi., 1, I", S. 1 7.   -t '1 IIHV are to be fouiul howrvcr in tlie more
roo'lmi Kaliliiiis, s. .Milttliai. lii.lisioiis!.;!. dor Apostrl •i, a, IS. ,•>.•>;•) ,fl; \ lill.l. Comm. i,

THE LIFE OF JESL'S.

134

to the other, that Jesus was concelvcil without human paternal par-
ticipation, and with it, therefore, stands or falls.  No one among the
interpreters wlio, in tills narrative, recognise a mythus in tlie full
signification of tliat tcriTi, lias been thus blind and inconsistent; all
have supposed a legitimate marriage between Josepli and Mary ; and
Olshausen merely paints tlie mythical mode of interpretation in cari-
cature, in order the more easily to set it aside; for he confesses tliat
in relation to tills portion of tlie gospel in particular, it lias much
tliat is dazzling.

§ 30. RELATION OF JOSEPH TO MARY-BROTHERS OF JESUS.

OUR Gospels, in tlie true spirit of the ancient legend, find it un-
becoming to allow tlie mother of Jesus, so long as slic bore the licav-

o                                                                  '0

enly germ, to be approached or profaned by an earthly husband.
Consequently Luke (il. 5.) represents tlie connexion between Joseph
and Mary, prior to tlie birth of Jesus, as a bctrothment merely.
And, as it is stated respecting the father of Plato, after Ills wife had
become pregnant by Apollo: 'uOc.v KaOapav ylflov (pvAa^cit M^ rrj(;

d-roTO/owc,'* so likewise it is remarked of Josepli in Matthew (i. 25.):

Ka'i OVK kylvwKev avTi'jv (~'/)v yvviilna avrov) 'Ktix^ ov KTKKK ~ov viw av-

-^c ~'uv tpu-oroKov. In each of these kindred passages the Greek
word KU<; (till) must evidently receive the same. interpretation. Now
in the tirst quotation tlie meaning is incontcstably this:-that till
"the time of Plato's birth his father abstained from intercourse with
his wife, but subsequently assumed his conjugal rights, since wo
hear of Plato's brothers.  In reference, therefore, to tlie parents of
Jesns, the 'w; cannot have a different signification; in cadi case it
indicates precisely tlie same limitation.   So again tlie expression

-poTuTOKoi; (firstborn) used in reference to Jesus in both tlie (Jospela
(Matt. i. 25, Luke ii. 7.) supposes tliat Mary had other children, for
as Lueian says: e( per TTp&Toc;, ov puvog ti 6c /wi'oc, ov 7Tp£iro<;.^ Fvcn
in tlie same Gospels (Matt. xiii. 55, Luke viii. 19.) mention is made
of dSe/^o^ 'lijow, (f./ie brothers of Jesns.') In the words of Fritz-
sclic: J^i^'iittss'tine post Jesu nataUs Mariam concessit Matt/mus
(Luke does the same) ii.roivm Jowp/w, in /we ww occuputus, ne
<pns untv iTesu pi'iirwrdia mntua you're usos suspicarctur.   But
tills did not continue to satisfy the orthodox: as the veneration for
Mary rose even higher, she wlio liad once become fruitful by divine
agency was not subsequently to be profaned by tlie common relations
of life.}: The opinion tliat Mary after tlie birth of Jesus became the
wife of Joseph, was early ranked among tlie heresies,§ and tlie or-
thodox Fathers sought every means to escape from it and to combat

* PioK. I-u'rt. a, a. 0. Sec Ori^cnc? c. Culs. 1, 37.  •)• l\'inoi]ax, 29.  t S. Origrnis
in Matllia'uiii a^c'ordin^ to Photius l.iui^lit, TOV '{uo-ij^ fiera ~//v ^juaruv Kvo^ofiiav cvva~T-
Ttff^fti n/ Trap^ti'iJ.  This was also, ac.mrdm^ to Kpipliania:', tlie drc-trinc of llm-y callid
liy liiin Din.a.i iii-s ami .\]iliili''iniiari:initi's, anil ill thi; linii; ul' .li'rnnn;, ut' IIrSviillu-i "ml
i ;. *• ii...........   <•,„,,,,„,.,. ,,,i (Ins iiniiit, tin; Sammluii.u- vou Suiciir, 1111 Tlicsaurua ii., s. v.

CONCEPTION OF JESL-S--ITS SUPERNATURAL CIIARACTEE. 135

it. They contended that according to the exegetical interpretation
of &>)(• ov, it sometimes affirmed or denied a thing, not merely up to
a certain limit, but beyond that limitation and for ever; and that tlie
words of Mattliew ovv eyivwitev avrifv {.w(; m i-ens K.. r. 1. excluded
a matrimonial connexion between Joseph and Mary for all time.*
In like manner it was asserted of the term -rpo-o-o/coc, tliat it did
not necessarily include tlie subsequent birth of other children, but
tliat it merely excluded' any previous birtli.f But in order to ban-
ish the thought of a matrimonial connexion between Mary and Jo-
seph, not only grammatically but physiologically, they represented
Josepli as a very old man, under whom Mary was placed for control
and protection only ; and tlie brothers of Jesus mentioned in tlie
New Testament they regarded as the children of Josepli by a former
marriage, f But this was not all; soon it was insisted not only tliat
Mary never became the wife of Josepli, but tliat in giving birth to
Jesus slic did not lose her virginity.§ But even tlie conservation
of Gary's virginity did not long continue to satisfy: perpetual vir-
ginity was likewise required on tlie part of Joseph.  It was not
cnou°'h tliat lie had no connexion witli Mary; it was also necessary
tliat Ins entire life should be one of celibacy. Accordingly, though
Epiphanius allows tliat Josepli liad sons by a former marriage, Je-
rome rejects tlie supposition as an impious and audacious invention ;

and from tliat time tlie brothers of Jesus were degraded to tlie rank
of cousins. ||

Some modern theologians agree with tlie Fathers of tlie Church
in maintaining tliat no matrimonial connexion subsisted at any time
between Joseph and Mary, and believe themselves able to explain
tlie gospel expressions which appear to assert tlie contrary. In ref-
erence to tlie term first born, (Jlshauscn contends that it signifies
an only son : no less than tlie eldest of several. Paulus allows that
here lie is right, and Clemcnl and Fritzsche seek in vain to demon-
strate tlie impossibility of this signification. For when it is said in
Exod. xiii. 2, BIT-T^B ••;;a ^'isa-iss •^•wp (TTpu~6~oicov TrpuToyevs^
LXXX.) it was not merely a firstborn followed by others subse-
quently born, wlio was sanctified to Jehovah, but tlie fruit of the
body of that mother of whom no other cliild liad previously been
born.  Therefore the term -pu-o-o/i-or must of iicccssitY bear also
tins signification   Truly however we must confess with Winer**
and others, on the other side, that if a narrator who was acquainted
witli tlie whole sequel of tlie history used tliat expression, we should
be tciiipt.e.d to understand it in its primitive sense; since had the
author intended to exclude other children, lie would rather have em-

* Ccnip. Hu.rnii. adY, Helv. 6, 7, Tlieophylact and Suulaa in Suierr, 1, s. v, Sn^f,
Fol. 1-J'U t, t HiiTon. z, d. St. f Scu Urig, in Mattli, Toin, 10, 17; Epiphan. ha.'i-i..-,. 7t>,
7; llistoria J<i;-rplii, c. 2 ; I'rutev. Jac. !), IS.  § Clirysostoiiius, liom. 1!2, ill Suiucr, s. v.
Mapta, iii(i!.t rrpul.-ivcly ilrsciiln'il in t'lr 1'rotcv. Jac, xix, ami xx,  |] llirron. ad Matth.
12, uiid adi-w. IIrlviil. 1').  «[ Die Bradcr Jrsu, In Winer's Zfit.schrit't f'lir wissuiischaft-
liclie 'lliculun'if, 1, 3. S. 3(it f.   ** Biblis.cbcs Eealworterbudi, 1, Ud, S. UU4., Anm. DC
Wclte, z, d, St.  Ncandrr I.. .1. Ch., S, 84.

THE LIFE Or' JESCS.

136

ploved the word /wwyer'/jc, or would have connected it with Trpu-ro-
TOKOC. It" tills be not quite decisive, tlie reasoning of Fritzsche in
reference to the wg w, K. r. X., is more convincing. He rejects the
citations adduced in support of the interpretation of the Fathers of
the Church, proving that this expression according to its primitive
signification affirms only to a given limit, and beyond tliat limit sup-
poses tlic logical opposite of tlie affirmation to take place; a signifi-
cation which it loses only when the context shows clearly tliat tlic
opposite is impossible in tlic nature of tilings.* For example, when
it is said OVK Kyivuanev av-t^v, w(; ov amOavsv, it is self-evident that
tlic negation, during tlic time elapsed till death-cannot be trans-
formed aftsr death into an affirmation; but when it is said, as in
Matthew, OVK e. d. w(; ov £~KKEV, tlie giving birth to tlic divine fruit
opposes no impossibility to tlic establishment of tlic conjugal rela-
tions ; on the contrary it renders it possible i. c. suitable f for them

now to take place.

Olshauscn, impelled by tlie same doctrinal motives which influ-
enced tlic Fathers, is led in this instance to contradict both the evi-
dence of grammar and of logic.  lie thinks tliat Josepli, without
wisliing to impair tlic sanctity of marriage, must have concluded af-
ter tlie experiences he liad liad (?) tliat his marriage with Alary liad
"another object than tlie production of children; besides it was but
natural (?) in tlic last descendant of tlic house of Uavid, and of tliat
particular branch from which tlie Messiah should come forth, to ter-
minate her race in tills last and eternal offshoot.

A curious ladder may be formed of these different beliefs and
superstitions in relation to tlic connexion between Mary and Josepli.

1. Contemporaries of Jesus and composers of the genealogies:

Joseph and Mary man and wife-Jesus tlic offspring of their mar-
riage.

2. Tlic age and authors of our histories of tlie birth of Josns:

Mary and Josepli betrothed only; Josepli having no participation
in tlic conception of tlie cliild, and previous to its birth no conjugal

connexion with Mary.

3. Olshauseii and others: subsequent to the birth of Jesus,

Josepli, though then tlie husband of Mary, relinquishes Ids matri-
monial rights.

4. Epiplmnius, Protcvangeliura Jacob! and others: Joseph a

decrepit, old man, no longer to be thought of as a husband; tlie
children attributed to him are of a former marriage. More especially
it is not as a bride and wife tliat lie receives Mary; lie takes her

merely under his guardianship.

> 5. Protevang., Chrysostom and others: Mary's virginity was
not only not destroyed by any subsequent births of children by Jo-

* Comment, in Muttll. S. 53 ff., vgl. auch S. 83.").  •(• Olshausen is exceedingly 1111-
Iiiippy m the example fbosen by him in support of Ills interpretation of wf ov. Fur wlicn
it i-' s^id, ir<- ir.iitr'l fill •iiuiluiijkt f'nf nu orie CHHK^ certiiiniy this liy no menus implies that
.'ft. r .,.;,ii.i..lit sunn- out' dill mine, but it dors imply that after midnight we waited no

CONCEPTION OF JESUS--ITS SUPERNATURAL CHAKACTEI;. 137

scph, it" was not in. the slighest degree impaired by the birth of

Jesus..                 .      .                             .    ''.

6. Jerome: not Mary only but Joseph also observed an abso-
lute virginity, and tlie pretended brothers of Jesus were not his sons

but merely cousins to Jesus.     .

Tlic opinion tliat tlie aSs^ol. (brothers) and a^eX<f>al 'lifmv (sis-
ters of Jesus) mentioned in tlie New Testament, were merely half
brothers or indeed cousins, appears in its origin, as shown above,
together witli tlie notion tliat no matrimonial connexion ever sub-
sisted between Joseph and Mary, as tlic mere invention of super-
stition, a circumstance highly prejudicial to such an opinion.  It is
however no less true tliat purely cxegctical grounds exist, in virtue
of which theologians wlio were free from prejudice have decided,
that tlie opinion tliat Jesus actually liad brothers is untenable.*
Had we merely the following passages-Matth. xiil. 55, Mark vi. 3,
where the people of Nazareth astonished at tlie wisdom of their coun-
tryman, in order to mark his well known origin, immediately after
having spoken of TEKTW (the carpenter) Ills father, and Ins mother
Mary, mention by name his drfe/li^twc ^brothers) James, Joscs, Si-
mon, and Judas, together witli his sisters wliosc names arc not
given;! again Mattli. xii. 4G, Luke viii. 19, when Ins mother and
his brethren come to Jesus ; John ii. 12, where Jesus journcvs with
his mother and his brethren to Capernaum; Acts i. 14, where they
are mentioned in immediate connexion with Ills mother-if we liad
these passages only, we could not for a moment hesitate to recog-
nize here real brothers of Jesus at least on tlic mother's side, chil-
dren of Josepli and Mary; not only on account of tlic proper signi-
fication of tlic word dde/u^oc, but also in consequence of its continual
conjunction wi'th Mary and Josepli. Even tlic passages-John vii.
5, in wliicli it is remarked tliat his brethren did not believe on
Jesus, and Mark iii. 21, compared with 31, where according to the
most probable explanation, tlic brothers of Jesus witli his mother
•went out to lay liold of him as one beside himself-furnish no ade-
quate grounds for relinquishing tlie proper signification of dde/l^oc.
Many theologians have interpreted d6eX(f>ov<; 'Irfaov in tlic last cited
passage half brothers, sons of Joseph by a former marriage, al-
leging tliat tlic real brothers of Jesus must have believed on him,
but tins is a mere assumption.  Tlic difficulty seems greater wlien
we read in John xix. 26 f. tliat Jesus on tlie cross, enjoined John
to be a son to his mother; an injunction it is not easy to regard as
suitable,,under tlic supposition tliat Mary liad other children, except
indeed these were half brothers and unfriendly to Jesus.  Never-
theless we can imagine tlic existence both of external circumstances
and of individual feelings wliicli might have influenced Jesus to con-
On this subject compare in particular Clemen, die Brudt'r Jesu, in Winer's Zcit-
schrift fur wissensch. Theol. 1, 3, S. S'-iy 11;; Paulus, exeg, Handbueh 1 Bd, S. .'>."»7 ff.i
Fritzche, a. a. 0. S. 4SO ft'.; Wincr'bibl. llealwurterbuch, in den A. A.: Jesus, Jacobua,
Apostrl. •I- See (In. dill'urcnt names assigned them in the legend in Thilo, Codex apocry-
plius N. T.. 1 S- XliS iii,tr.

THE LIFE OF JESLS.

13S

fide his mother to John rather than to his brothers. That tliese
brothers appeared in company with Ins Apostles after the ascension
(Acts i. 14,) is no proof that they must liave believed on Jesus at

the time of his death.

The real perplexity in the matter, however, originates in this:

that besides the James and Joscs spoken of as the brothers of Jesus,
two men of the same name are mentioned as tlie sons of another
Mary (Mark xv. 40, 47, xvi. 1, Matt. xxvii. 56,) witliout doubt tliat
Mary who is designated, John xix. 25, as the sister of the mother
of Jesus, and tlie wife of Cicophas: so that we liave a James and a
Joscs not. only among tlie children of Mary tlie mother of Jesus, but
again among her sister's childcrn. We meet with several others
among those immediately connected with Jesus, whose names are
identical. In the lists of tlie Apostles (Matth. x. 2 ff., Luke vi. 14
ft.) we have two more of tlie name of James: that is four, tlie bro-
ther and cousin of Jesus included; two more oftlic name of Judas:

tliat is three, tlie brother of Jesus included; two of the name of
Simon, also making three with tlie brother of Jesus of tlie sime
name. Tlie question naturally arises, wlictlicr tlie same individual
is not here taken as distinct persons ? Tlie suspicion is almost un-
avoidable in reference to James. As James tlie son of Alpheus is,
in the list of tlie Apostles, introduced after tlie son of Zebcdcc, as
tlie second, perhaps tlie younger; and. as James tlie cousin of Jesus
is called 6 pinpoc; ("the less") Mark. xv. 40; and since by compar-
ing John xix. 25, we find tliat tlie latter is called tlie son of Cleo-
plias, it is possible tliat tlie name K^co-rac (Cicophas) given to tlie
husband of Mary's sister, and tlie name 'A-^olo^ (Alpheus) given to
tlie father of tlie apostle, may be onlv different forms of tlie Hebrew
?a";"]i. Thus would tlie second James enumerated among tlie Apos-
tles and tlie cousin of Jesus of tliat name be identical, and there
would remain besides him only tlie son of Zebcdcc and the brother
of Jesus. Now in tlie Acts (xv. 13) a James appears wlio takes a
prominent part in tlie so-called apostolic council, and as, according
to Acts xil. 2, tlie son of Zcbcdce had previously been put to death,
and as in the foregoing portion of the book of tlie Acts no mention
is made of any other James besides tlie son of Alpheus (i. 13) so
this James, of whom (Acts xv. 13,) no more precise description is
given, can be no other than tlie son of Alpheus.  iiut Paul speaks
of a James (Gal. i. 19) the, .Lord's brother, whom lie saw at Jerusa-
lem, and it, is doubtless lie of whom lie speaks in connexion with
Ceplias and John as the arv^ot (pillars) of tlie church-for this is
precisely in character witli tlie (Apostle) James as he appeared at
tlie apostolic council-so tliat this James may be considered as iden-
tical with the Lord's brother, and tlie rather as tlie expression e-cpor
6s -fair aTrooro^uv OVK Etdov, d fitf 'Idnuftov ~uv aSsX^ov rov K-vpiov
(but other of the apostles saio I none, save •Tames the .Lord's
brother. Gal. i. 19,) makes it appear as if tlie Lord's brother were
i    i --,.,„ 4.1,., ,.,^.,iinc,. •uritl, wliipli ;ilso tlie ancient tradition

CONCEPTION OF JESL-S--ITS SCPEEyATCEAL CHARACTER. 139

which represents James tlie Just, a brother of Jesus, as the first
head of tlie church at Jerusalem, agrees.* But admitting tlie James
of tlie Acts to be identical with the distinguished Apostle of that
name, then is lie tlie son of Alpheus, and not tlie son of Joseph;

consequently if lie be at tlie same time a6eX(^o<; rov 'K.vpiov, then
d6e^(f)oc cannot signify a brother.  Now if Alpheus and Cleophas
are admitted to be tlie same individual, the husband of the sister of
Mary tlie mother of Jesus, it is obvious that dJc/l^bc, used to denote
tlie relationship of his son to Jesus, must be taken in the signifi-
cation, cousin. If, 'after tills manner, James tlie Apostle tlie son of
Alpheus be identified with the cousin, and the cousin be identified
witli tlie brother of Jesus of tlie same name, it is obvious that 'lov-
6a(; 'laiM^ov in tlie catalogue of tlie Apostles in Luke (Luke vi. 16,
Acts i. 13,) must be translated brother of Jnines (son of Alpheus);

and tins Apostle Jude must be lield as identical witli tlie Jude
a6eA.(ft)g 'ITJOOV, tliat is, witli tlie cousin of the Lord and son of Mary
Cicophas ; (though tlie name of Jnde is never mentioned in connex-
ion with tins Mary.) If the Epistle of Jude in our canon be au-
thentic, it is confirmatory of tlie above deduction, that tlie author
(verse 1) designates himself as tlie d6eXipb(; 'laKupov (brother of
James).  Some moreover have identified tlie Apostle Simon 6 i,r]Xw-
TT]<; or K.avavirrj(; (Zeiotes or the Cannanitc) witli tlie Simon enumer-
ated among the brothers of Jesus (Mark vi. 3,) and who according
to a tradition of tlie church succeeded James as licad of tlie church
at Jerusalem;! so that Joscs alone appears witliout further desig-
nation or appellative.

If, accordingly, those spoken of as aOEAffiol 'I^oov were merely
cousins, and tin-ee of these were Apostles, it must excite surprise
that not only in tlie Acts, (i. 14,) after an enumeration of tlie Apos-
tles, tlie brothers of Jesus are separately particularized, but that also
(1 Cor. ix. 5.) they appear to be a class distinct from tlie Apostles.
Perhaps, also, tlie passage Gal. 1. 19 ought to be understood as in-
dicating that James, tlie Lord's brother, was not an Apostle.^ It
therefore, tlio dSeX(j)ol 'I'i]aov seem thus to be extruded from the
number of tlie Apostles, it is yet more difficult to regard them
merely as tlie cousins of Jesus, since they appear in so many places
immediately associated witli tlie mother of Jesus, and in two or
three passages only are two men bearing tlie same names mentioned
in connexion with tlie other Mary, wlio accordingly would be their
real mother. The Greek word d(5e/t0oc, may indeed signify, in lan-
guage which pretends not to precision, as well as the Hebrew nx
a more distant relative; but as it is repeatedly used to express the
relationship of tliese persons to Jesus, and is in no instance replaced
by dveiptbi;-a word wliicli is not foreign to tlie New Testament lan-
guage when the relationship of cousin is to be denoted (Col. iv. 10.)
it cannot well be" taken in any oilier than its proper signification.
I'urther, it need only be pointed out that tlie highest degree of un-

H 1 + T7,,a, TT T1 H + 1;'r;t»e,.ht in MatHl. n .tRI

140

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

certainty exists respecting not only the identity of tlie names Al-
pliCTis anil Cicophas, •upon which the identity of James tlic cousin
of Jesus and of tlie Apostle James tlie Less rests, lint also regard-
ing the translation of 'lovSac; 'laicu^ov by tlie brother of James ;

and likewise respecting the assumed identity -of the author of the
last Catholic Epistle with tlic Apostle Jude.

Thus tlie web of tills identification gives way at all points, and
we are forced back to the position whence we set out; so that we
have again real brothers of Jesus, also two cousins distinct from these
brothers, though bearing the same names with two of them, besides
some Apostles of the same names with both brothers and cousins.
To find two pairs of sons of tlic same names in a family is, indeed,
not so uncommon as to become a source of objection. It is, how-
ever, remarkable that tlie same James wlio in the Epistle to tlie
G-alatians is designated aSe^'w Kvpibv (the Lord's brother'), must
unquestionably, according to the Acts of tlie Apostles, be regarded
as tlie son of Alplieus; which lie could not be if this expression
signified a brother. So that there is perplexity on every side, which
can be solved only (and tlien, indeed, but negatively and without
historical result) by admitting tlic existence of obscurity and error
on tilis point in the New Testament writers, and even in the very
earliest Christian traditions; error which, in matters of involved
relationships and family names, is far more easily fallen into than
avoided.*

A\"e have consequently no ground for denying tliat the mother
of Jesus bore her husband several other children besides Jesus,
younger, and perhaps also older; the latter, because the representa-
tion in the New Testament that Jesus was the first-born may belong
no less to tlic mythus tlian the representation of the Fathers that lie
was an only son.

§ 31. VISIT OF MAKY TO ELIZABETH.

THE angel who announced to Mary her own approaching preg-
nancy, at tlie same time informed her (Luke i. 36.) of that of her
relative Elizabeth, witli whom it was" already the sixth month.
Hereupon Mary immediately set out on a journey to her cousin, a
visit which was attended by extraordinary occurrences; for when
Elizabetli heard tlic salutation of Mary, tlie babe leaped in her womb
for joy; slic also became inspired, and in her exultation poured torth
an address to Mary as the future mother of the Messiah, to which
Mary responded by a hymn of praise (Luke i. 39-56).

The rationalistic interpreter believes it to be an easy matter to

Sive a natural explanation of tills narrative of tlie Gospel of Luke.
Ie is of opinion f tliat tlic unknown individual wlio excited such
peculiar anticipations in Mary, had at tlic same time acquainted her
with tlie similar situation of her cousin Elizabetli. Tilis it was

VISIT OF MARY TO ELIZABETH.             141

which impelled Mary the more strongly to confer on the subject with
her older relative. Arrived at her cousin's dwelling, she first of all
made known wliat liad liappened to herself; but upon this the nar-
rator is silent, not wishing to repeat what he had just before de-
scribed. And here, tlic Rationalist not only supposes the address
of Elizabeth to have been preceded by some communication from
Mary, but imagines Mary to have related lier history piecemeal, so
as to allow Elizabeth to throw in sentences during the intervals.
The excitement of Elizabetli-such is tlie continuation of the ratio-
nalistic explanation-communicated itself, according to natural laws,
to the cliild, who, as is usual witli an embryo of six months, made
a movement, which -was first regarded by tlic mother as significant,
and as the consequence of tlie salutation, after Mary's farther com-
munications. Just as natural does it appear to the Rationalist that
Mary should have given utterance to licr Messianic expectations,
confirmed as they were by Elizabetli, in a kind of psalmodic recita-
tive, composed of reminiscences borrowed from various parts of the
Old Testament.

But there is much in tilis explanation which positively contra-
dicts tlie text. In the first place, tliat Elizabetli should have learned
tlie heavenly message imparted to Stary from Mary herself. There
is no trace in tlie narrative cither of any communication preceding
Elizabetli's address, or of interruptions occasioned by farther ex-
planations on tlie part of Mary. On tlie contrary, as it is a super-
natural revelation, which acquaints Mary witli tlic pregnancy of
Elizabetli, so also it is to a revelation that Elizabetli's immediate
recognition of Mary, as the chosen mother of the Messiah, is attrib-
uted.* As little will tlie other feature of tilis narrative-that the
entrance of tlie mother of tlie Messiah occasioned a responsive move-
ment in liis mother's womb on the part of Ilia forerunner-bear
a natural explanation. In modern times indeed even orthodox inter-
preters have inclined to tilis explanation, but with tlie modification,
tliat Elizabetli in tlie first place received a revelation, in which how-
ever tlie cliild, owing to tlic mother's excitement, a. matter to be
physiologically explained, likewise took part.f But tlie record does
not represent tlie tiling as if tlic excitement of tlie mother were tlie
determining cause of the movement of tlie cliild; on tlie contrary
(v. 41.) tlie emotion of the mother follows tlie movement of the,
cliild, and Elizabetli's own account states, that it was the saluta-
tion of Mary (v. 44.'i, not indeed from its particular signification,
but merely as the voice, of the mother of tlic Messiah, which pro-
duced tlie movement of tlic unborn babe: undeniably assuming some-
thing supernatural. But even herein tlic supranaturalistic view of
tilis miracle is not free from objection, even on its own ground;

.3
utcd.*

and hence tlie anxiety of tlie above mentioned modern orthodox
interpreters to evade it. It may be possible to conceive tlie human

• S. Olshausen und de Wette, z. d. St.   + Hess, Geschichto Jesu, 1, S. 26; Ols.

142

THE LIFE OF JESS'S.

mind immediately acted upon by tlic divine inind, to winch it is
related, but how solve tlic diniculty of an immediate communication
of the divine mind to an uniiitclliscnt, embryo? And if we inquire
tlie object of so strange a miracle, none which is worthy presents
itself. 'Should it be referred to tlic necessity that, tlie Baptist should
receive the earliest possible intimation of tlic work to which lie was
destined; still we know not how such an. impression could have
been made upon an embryo.  Should tlic purpose be supposed to
centre in tlic other individuals, in Mary or Elizabeth ; they had been
tlic recipients of far higher revelations, and were consequently al-
ready possessed of an adequate measure of insight and faith.

No fewer difficulties oppose the rationalistic tlian the suprana-
turalistic explanation of tlic hymn pronounced by Mary. For though
it is not, like tlic Canticle of Zacliarlas (v, G7.) and tlic address of
Elizabeth (v. 41.) introduced by tlie formula E-lfpOr] -vevwTOf
dyiov she. was filUd with the JIoly Ghost, still tlio similarity of
these utterances is so great, tliat tlie omission cannot be adduced
as a pro3f that the narrator did not, intend to represent tills, equally
witii tlic other two, as the operation of tlie TTvevpa (spirit). But
apart from the intention of tlic narrator, can it be thought natural
tliat two friends visiting one another should, even in tlic midst of
the most extraordinary occurrences, break forth into long hymns,
and that. their conversation should entirely lose tlic character of dia-
logue, the natural form on such occasions'? By a supernatural influ-
ence alone could tlic minds of tlic two friends be attuned to a state
of elevation, so foreign to their every day life. But if indeed Mary's
hymn is to be understood as tlie work of tlie Holy Spirit, it is sur-
prisina: tliat a speech emanating immediately from tlic divine source
of inspiration should not be, more striking for its originality, but
should be so interlarded with reminiscences from the Old Testament,
borrowed from tlic song of praise spoken by the mother of Samuel
(1 Sam. ii.) under analogous circumstances.'* Accordingly we must
admit that tlic compilation of tills hymn, consisting of recollections
from tlie Old Testament, was put together in a natural way; but
allowinc its composition toJiavc been perfectly natural, it cannot be
ascribed to tlic artless Mary, but to him wlio poetically wrought out
tlic tradition in circulation respecting tlic scene in question.

Since then we tind all tlic principal incidents of this visit in-
conceivable according to tlic supernatural interpretation ; also that
they will not bear a natural explanation ; we arc led to seek a mythi-
cal exposition of this as well as tlic preceding portions of the gospel
history.  Tills path lias already been entered upon by others.  Tlic
view of this narrative given by tlie anonymous E. F. in Hcnkc's
Ma2;azinc,t is, tliat it docs not pourtray events as they actually did

* Compare Luke i. 47 wi:li 1 Sam. ii. 1.   Particularly Luke i. 4S with 1 Sam, i. 11.
i. 41)             ii. 2.    Compare Luke i. ,'iO with l)>'ut. vii. 9.
i. .'»1             ii. 3, -1-.                i. •">^      Erclesiasticua x. 14.
i- .">2             ii. 8.                   i. fU      P^a. xcviii. 3.

143

VISIT OF MART TO ELIZABETH.

occur, but as they might have occurred; that much which the sequel
taught of the destiny of tlieir sons was carried back into the speeches
of these women, which were also enriched by other features gleaned
from tradition; tliat a true fact however lies at the bottom, namely
an actual visit of Mary to Elizabeth, a joyous conversation, and the
expression of gratitude to God; all which might have happened.
solely in virtue of tlie high importance attaclicd by Orientals to the
joys of maternity, even though tlic two mothers had been at tliat
time ignorant of tlie destination of tlieir children. This author is
of opinion that Mary, when pondering over at a later period the re-
markable life of her son, may often have related the happy meeting
With her cousin and their mutual expressions of thankfulness to
God, and tliat thus tlie history gained currency. Horst also, who
has a just conception of the fictitious nature of this section in Luke,
and ably refutes tlic natural mode of explanation, yet himself slides
unawares half-way back into it. He thinks it not improbable that
Mary during her pregnancy, which was in many respects a painful
one, should liave visited her older and more experienced cousin, and
tliat Elizabeth sliould during tills visit have felt the first movement
of lier child; ah occurrence which as it was afterwards regarded as
ominous, was preserved by the oral tradition.*

These are farther examples of the uncritical proceeding which
pretends to disengage tlie mythical and poetical from tlie narrative,
by plucking away a few twigs and blossoms of tliat growth, whilst
it leaves tlic very root of tlie mythus undisturbed as purely histori-
cal.  In our narrative tlie principal mythical feature (the remainder
forms only its adjuncts) is precisely tliat which the above mentioned
authors, in tlieir pretended mythical explanations, retain as histori-
cal : namely tlie visit of Mary to the, pregnant Elizabeth.  For, as
we have already seen, tlic main tendency of tlie first cliapter of Luke
is to magnify Jesus by connecting tlie Baptist with him from the
earliest possible point in a relation of inferiority. Now this object
could not be better attained than by brinc'ln"' about a meetin"", not

.           ,                                                                                                              •/                    0       0                                                         &'

in tlie first instance of tlic sons, but of the mothers in reference to
tlieir sons, during tlieir pregnancy, at. wliicli meeting some occur-
rence which should prefigure the future relative positions of these
two men sliould take place. Now tlie more apparent tlie existence
ot a dogmatical motive as the origin of this visit, tlie less proba-
bility is there tliat it liad an liistorical foundation. With this prin-
cipal feature the other details are connected in the following order:-
Tlie visit of tlie two w^n.cn must be represented as possible and
probable by tlie feature of family relationship between Mary and
Elizabeth (v. 36.), which would also give a greater suitability to the
subsequent connexion of tlie sons.  Further a visit, so full of im-
port, made precisely at tliat time, must liave taken place by special
divine appointment; therefore, it is an angel who refers Mary to her
cousin. At tlic visit the subservient position of the Baptist to Jesus

144

THE LIFE OF JESCS.

is to be particularly exhibited;-this could have been effected by
the mother as indeed it is in her address to Mary, but it were better
if possible tliat the future Baptist himself should give a sign. The
mutual relation of Esau and Jacob liad been prefigured by their
struggles and position in their mother's womb. (Gen. xxv. 22. ft.)
But, without too violent an offence against the laws of probability
an ominous movement would not be attributed to the cliild prior to
tliat period of her pregnancy at which tlie motion of tlie foetus is
felt; hence the necessity that Elizabeth should be in the sixth
month of her pregnancy when Mary, in consequence of tlie commu-
nication of tlie angel, set out to visit her cousin (v. 36.). Thus as
Schleiermacher remarks* tlie whole arrangemept of times had refer-
ence to tlie particular circumstance tlie author desired to contrive-
tlie jovous responsive movement of the cliild in his mother's womb
at the moment of Mary's entrance. To this end only must Mary's
visit be delayed till after tlio fifth month; and tlie angel not appear
to her before that period.

Thus not only does tlie visit of Mary to Elizabetli with all the
attendant circumstances disappear from the page of history, but the
historical validity of the further details-that John was only half a
year older than Jesus ; tliat tlio two mothers were related; that an
intimacy subsisted between the families;-cannot be affirmed on
tlie testimony of Luke, unsupported by other authorities: indeed,
tlie contrary rather will be found substantiated in the course of our
critical investigations.
