SECOND PART.

HISTORY OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

CHAPTER L

RELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.

§ 44. CHEONOLOGICAL RELATIONS BETWEEN JOHN AND JESUS.

FOE the ministry of John the Baptist, mentioned in all the

Gospels, the second and fourth evangelists fix no epoch; the first
gives us an inexact one; the third, one apparently precise. Accord-
ing to Matt. iii. 1. John appeared as a preacher of repentance, in.
those dans, EV rcTiv; fj^epai-g siceivaK;, that is, if we interpret strictly
this reference to the previous narrative, about the time when the
parents of Jesus settled at Nazareth, and when Jesus was yet a
child. We are told, however, in the context, that Jesus came to
John for baptism; hence between the first appearance of the Baptist,
which was cotemporary with the childhood of Jesus, and the period
at which the latter was baptized, we must intercalculate a number of
years, during which Jesus might have become sufficiently matured
to partake of John's baptism. But Matthew's description of the
person and work of the Baptist is so concise, the office attributed to
him is so little independent, so entirely subservient to that of Jesus,
that it was certainly not the intention of the evangelist to assign a
long series of years to his single ministry. His meaning incontest-
ably is, that John's short career early attained its goal in the bap-
tism of Jesus.

It being thus inadmissible to suppose between the appearance
of John and the baptism of Jesus, that is, between verses 12 and
13 of the 3rd chapter of Matthew, the long interval which is in
every case indispensable, nothing remains but to insert it between
the close of the second and the beginning of the third chapter,
namely, between the settlement of the parents of Jesus at Nazareth
and the appearance of the Baptist. To this end we may presume,
with Paulus, tliat Matthew has here introduced a fragment from a
history of the Baptist, narrating many particulars of his life immedi-

210

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

with the words, in those days, KV T(W? fnispaif sitstva^, which con-
necting phrase Matthew, although he omitted that to which it refer-
red, lias nevertheless retained ;* or we may, witli Sfiskind, apply
the words, not to the settlement, but to tlic subsequent residence of
Jesus at Nazareth ;f or better still, ev rate; ruiKpaic; enelvaic;, like the
corresponding Hebrew expression, Wl o'1'?^? e. g., Exod. ii. 11. is
probably to be interpreted as relating indeed to the establishment
at Nazareth, but so that an event happening thirty years afterwards
may yet be said, speaking indefinitely, to occur in those days.^ In
neither case do we learn from Matthew concerning the time of
John's appearance more than the, very vague information, tliat it
took place in the interval between the infancy and manhood of
Jesus.

Luke determines tlie date of John's appearance by various syn-
chronisms, placing it in the time of Pilate's government in Judea;

in the sovereignty of Herod (Antipas), of Philip and of Lysanias
over the other divisions of Palestine ; in the high priesthood of
Annas and Gaiaphas ; and, moreover, precisely in the 15th year of
the reign of Tiberius, which, reckoning from the death of Augustus,
corresponds with the year 28-29 of our era§ (iii. 1. 2). With this
last and closest demarcation of time all tlie foregoing less precise
.ones agree. Even that which makes Annas high priest together
witli Caiaplias appears correct, if we consider the peculiar influence
which, according to John xviii. 13. Acts iv. 6., that ex-liigh priest
retained, even when deposed, especially after the assumption of
•office by his son-in-law, Caiaphas.

A single exception occurs in the statement about Lysanias,
whom Luke makes cotemporary with Antipas and Pliilip as tetrarch
of Abilene. Josephus, it is true, speaks of an 'A)3(Aa T] Avaaviov,
and mentions a Lysanias as governor of Clialcis in Lebanon, near
to which lay the territory of Abila ; so that the same Lvsanias was
probably master of the latter. But this Lysanias was, at the insti-
gation of Cleopatra, put to death 34 years before tlie birth of Christ,
and a second Lysanias is not mentioned either by Josephus, or by
any other writer on tlie period in question. || Tlius, not only is tlie
time of his government earlier by 60 years than tlie loth year of
Tiberius, but it is also at, issue with tlie other dates associated with
it by Luke. Hence it has been conjectured that Luke here speaks
of a younger Lysanias, the descendant of the earlier one, wlio pos-
sessed Abilene under Tiberius, but who, being less famous, is not
noticed by Josephus.^  We cannot indeed prove what Saskind

* Exeget. Handbuch. 1, a, S. 46. Schneckenburger agrees with him, iiber den Ur-
aprung des ersten kanon. Evang. S. 30.   ^ Vermisehte Aufsafcze, S. 76 ft'. Compare
Schneckenburger, ut sup. ^ Ue Wette and Fril.zsche, in loc. § See Paulus, ut sup. 336.
|| I here collect all the passages in Josephus relative to Lysaniaa, with the parallel pas-
sages in Dio Cassius. Antiq. xiii. xvi. 3, xiv. iii. 2, vii. 8-Aiitiq. xv. iv. 1, B. j. i. xiii.
1 (Dio Cassius xlix. 33). Antiq. xv. x. 1-3. B. j. i. xx. 4 (Dio Cass. liv. 9). Antiq.
xvii. xi. 4. B.j. ii. vi. 3. Antiq. xviii. vi. 10. B. j. ii. ix. 6 (Dio Cass. lix. S) Antiq.
xix. v. 1. B i. ii. xi. 5. Anti<a. xx. v. 2. vii. 1. B. i. ii. xii, 8. T Siiskind. vermischte

EELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   211

demands for the refutation of this hypothesis, namely, that had

such a younger Lvsanias existed, Joseplius must have mentioned
him ; yet that lie had more than one inducement to do so, Paulus
has satisfactorily shown. Especially, when in relation to the times
of the first and second Agrippa lie designates Abila, •f] Avaaviov, he
must have been reminded that he ha,d only treated of the elder Ly-
sanias, and not at all of the younger, from whom, as the later ruler,
the country must at tliat time liave derived its second appellation.*
If, according to tills, the younger Lysanias is but an historic fiction,
the proposed alternative is but a pliilological one.f For when it is
said in tlie first place: <S>iX'i,n~ov-rsrpap^ovv-og T?^ 'IrovpatcK;, K. r. X.,
and wlien it follows: nal Avaaviov rrjr; 'A;3(/b;r?)c Terpap^ovvroy : we
cannot possibly understand from this, that Philip reigned also over
the Abilene of Lysanias. Por in that case tlie word re-pap^owroc
ought not to have been repeated,^ and rij<; ouglit to have been placed
before Lysanias, if tlie author wished to avoid misconstruction. The
conclusion is therefore inevitable that the writer himself erred, and,
from tlie circumstance that Abilene, even in recent times, was called,
after tlie last ruler of the former dynasty, f] Avaaviov, drew the in-
ference tliat a monarch of that name was still existing; wliile, in
fact, Abilene either belonged to Pliilip, or was immediately subject
to tlie E,omans.§

The above chronological notation relates directly to John the
Baptist alone; a similar one is wanting wlien Luke begins farther
on (v. 21 ff.) to speak of Jesus. Of him it is merely said tliat he
was about thirty years of age, masi er&v -pidnovra, on his public
appearance, (dp^Ojuevo?), but 'no date is given; while, in tlie case of
John, there is a contrary omission. Thus even if John commenced
his ministry in the 15th year of Tiberius, we cannot thence gatlier
anything as to the time when Jesus commenced his, as it is nowhere
said how long John liad been baptizing wlien Jesus came to him
on tlie Jordan; wliile on the other hand, although we know that
Jesus, at his baptism, was about 30 years old, this does not help
us to ascertain the age of John wlien he entered on his ministry as
Baptist. Remembering, however, Luke i. 26, according to which
John was just half a year older than Jesus, and calling to our aid

* Tlioluck thinks he has found a perfectly corresponding example in Tacitus. When
this historian, Annal. ii. 43 (A. D. 17), mentions the death of an Arehelaus, king of Cap-
podocia, and yet, Annal. vi. 41 (A. D. 36), cites an Archelans, also a Cappadocian, as ruler
of the Clittie, the same historical conjecture, says Tholuck, is necessary, viz. that there
•were two Cappadocians named Arehelaus. But when the same historian, after noticing
the death of a man, introduces another of the same name, under different circumstances,
it is no conjecture, but a clear historic datum, that there were two such persons. It is
quite otherwise when, as in the case of Lysanias, two writers have each one of the same
name, but assign him distinct epochs. Here it is indeed a conjecture to admit two suc-
cessive persons; a conjecture so much the less historial, the more improbable it is shown
to be that one of the two writers "would have been siient respecting the second of the like-
named men, had such an one existed.   •}• Michaelis, Paulus, in loc. Schneckenburger, in
Ullmann's und Umlireit's Studien, 1833, 4. Heft. S. 1036 ff. Tholuck, S. 201 ff. t For,
on the authority of a single manuscript to erasp, with Schneckenburger and others, the
secend vsTpap^ovvrof, is too evident violence.   § Compare with this view, Allgem. Lit,

Zt-cr   ]R(l:-t  \n Sll  « r.KO. n- W,,**- -.-- tr...,.ll..._l. :-1».,

212

THE LIFE OF JESU8.

the fact tliat Jewish usage •would, scarcely permit the exercise of
public functions before the thirtieth year, we miglit infer that the
Baptist could only have appeared half a year before the arrival of
Jesus on the banks of the Jordan, since he would only so much
earlier have attained the requisite age. But no express law forbade
a public appearance previous to the thirtieth year; and it has been
justly questioned whether we can apply to the freer office of a Prophet
a restriction which concerned the Priests and Levites, for whom the
thirtieth year was fixed for tlieir entrance on regular service* (Num.
iv. 3. 47.  Compare besides 2 Chron. xxxi. 17. where the 20th
year is named). This then would not hinder us from placing the
appearance of Jolin considerably prior to that of Jesus, even pre-
supposing the averred relation between their ages. Hardly, how-
ever, could tills be the intention of the Evangelist. For to ascertain
so carefully tlie date of the Forerunner's appearance, and leave that
of the Messiah himself undetermined, would be too great an over-
sight,! and we cannot but suppose that his design, in the particulars
he gives concerning John, was to fix the time for the appearance of
Jesus. To agree with this purpose, he must have understood that
Jesus came to the banks of tlie Jordan and began to teach, shortly
after the appearance of John.} For that the above chronological
determination was originally merely the introduction to a document
concerning John, quoted by Luke, is improbable, since its exactness
corresponds with the style of him who had perfect understanding
of alt things from the very first, •napi]iio'^.ovQi]K6-i avuOev •KOOIV
wpipSx;, and who souglit to determine, in like manner, tlie epoch of
the Messiah's birth.

It is not easy, however, to imagine, in accordance with this
statement, that John was by so little the predecessor of Jesus, nor
is it without reason that tlie improbability of his having had so
short an agency is maintained. For he had. a considerable number
of disciples, wliom he not only baptized but taught (Luke xi. 1.),
and he left behind a party of his peculiar followers (Acts xviii. 25.
xix. 3.), all which could hardly be the work of a few months. There
needed time, it lias been observed, for the Baptist to become so well
known, that people would undertake a journey to him in the wilder-
ness ; there needed time for his doctrine to be comprehended, time
for it to gain a footing and establish itself, especially as it clashed
with the current Jewish ideas; in a word, the deep and lasting vener-
ation in which John was held by his nation, according to Josephus §
as well as the evangelists, could not have been so hastily won.jj

But the foregoing considerations, although they demand, in gen-
eral, a longer agency for the Baptist, do not prove tliat the evange-
lists err in placing the commencement of his ministry shortly before

* See Paulus, S. 294. f See Schleiermacher, ilber den Lulsas, S. 62. :{ Bengel waa
also of this opinion. Ordo temporum, S. 204 f. ed. 2.   § Antiq. xviii. v, 2,   || So Clu-
diua, ubcr die Zeit und Lebensdauer Johannis und Jesiii In Ueuke's Museum, iii iii,

RELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   213

that of Jesus, since they might suppose the required prolongation
as a sequel, instead of an introduction, to the appearance of Jesus.
Such a prolongation of the Baptist's ministry, however, is not to be
found, at least in the first two Gospels; for not only do these con-
tain no details concerning John, after the baptism of Jesus, except
his sending two disciples (Matt. xi.), wliich is represented as a con-
sequence of his imprisonment; but we gather from Matt. iv. 12.
Mark i. 14. tliat during or shortly after the forty days' abode of
Jesus in the wilderness, the Baptist was arrested, and thereupon
Jesus went into Galilee, and entered on his public career. Luke,
it is true, (iv. 14.) does not mention the imprisonment of Jolm as
the cause of the appearance of Jesus in G-alilee, and he seems to
regard the commission of the two disciples as occurring while John
was at large (vii. 18 ff.); and the fourth Evangelist testifies yet
more decisively against the notion that Jolm was arrested so soon
after the baptism of Jesus : for in cliap. iii. 24. it is expressly stated,
that John was actively engaged in his ministry after tlie first pass-
over, attended by Jesus during his public life. But on the one
hand, as it appears from Luke ix. 9. Matt. xiv. 1 ff. Mark xiv. 16.
that John was put to death long before Jesus, tlie continuance of
his agency after the rise of the latter could not be very protracted
(Luke ix. 9. Matt. xiv. 1 ff. Mark xiv. 16.); and on tlie other, that
which may be added to the agency of John after tlie appearance of
Jesus, will not make amends for that which is subtracted from it
before that epocli. For, apart from the tact implied by the fourth
Evangelist (i. 35.) tliat the Baptist liad formed a definite circle of
familiar disciples before the appearance of Jesus, it would be diffi-
cult to account for the firm footing acquired by his scliool, if he liad
laboured only a few months, to be, at their close, eclipsed by Jesus.

There is yet one resource, namely, to separate the baptism of
Jesus from the commencement of his ministry, and to say: It was
indeed after the first half year of John's agency that Jesus was so
attracted by his fame, as to become a candidate for his baptism;

but for some time subsequently, he eitlier remained among tlie fol-
lowers of the Baptist, or went again into retirement, and did not
present himself independently until a considerable interval had
elapsed. By this means we should obtain the requisite extension
of John's ministry prior to the more brilliant career of Jesus, with-
out impugning the apparent statement of our evangelists that the
baptism of Jesus followed close upon the public appearance of Jolm.
But the idea of a long interim, between tlie baptism of Jesus and
the commencement of Ills ministry, is utterly foreign to tlie ]Sew
Testament writers. For tliat they regard tlie baptism of Jesus as
his consecration to the Messianic office, is proved by tlie accompany-
ing descent of tlie spirit and the voice from heaven; the only pause
wliich they allow to intervene, is the six weeks' last in the wilder-
ness, immediately after wliich, according to Luke, or after tlie ap-

______1            ,             "                          ,       i«   . 1        7^     ^ •   .                    T           .      -»«-.,1

214

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

and Mark, Jesus, appears in Galilee. Luke, in particular, by de-
signating (iii. 23.) the baptism of Jesus as his dp^Ea6ai, his assump-
tion of office, and by dating the intercourse of Jesus witli his disciples
from the pdnriap.a '\wvvav (Acts i. 22.), evinces his persuasion
that the baptism and public manifestation of Jesus were identical.

Tlius the gospel narrative is an obstacle to the adoption of tlie
two most plausible expedients for tlie prolongation of John's minis-
try, viz., that Jesus presented liimself for baptism later, or that his
public appearance was retarded longer after his baptism, than has
been generally inferred. We are not, however, compelled to re-
nounce either of these suppositions, if we can show that the New
Testament writers miglit have been led to their point of view even
without historical grounds. A sufficient motive lies close at hand,
and is implied in tlie foregoing observations. Let the Baptist once
be considered, as was the case in the Christian church (Acts xix. 4.),
not a person of independent significance, but simply a Forerunner
of the Christ; and the imagination would not linger with tlie mere
Precursor, but would hasten forward to tlie object at which he
pointed. Yet more obvious is tlie interest which primitive Christian
tradition must have had in excluding, whatever might have beeii
the fact, any interval between the baptism of Jeeus and the begin-
ning of Ills public course. For to allow tliat Jesus, by his submis-
sion to John's baptism, declared himself his disciple, and remained
in that relation for any length of time, was offensive to the religious
sentiment of tlie new church, which desired a Founder instructed by
God, and not by man: another turn, therefore, would soon be given
to the facts, and tlie baptism of Jesus would be lield to signify, not
his initiation into tlie school of Jolm, but a consecration to his in-
dependent office. Thus the diverging testimony of the evangelists
does not preclude our adopting tlie conclusion to wliich the nature
of tlie case leads us; viz., that tlie Baptist had been long labouring,
anterior to the appearance of Jesus.

If, in addition to tills, we accept tlie statement of Luke (i. 26.
and iii. 23.), that Jesus, being only half a year younger tlian Jolin,
•was about in his thirtieth year ht his appearance, we must suppose
that Jolin was in his twentieth year wlien be began his ministry.
There is, as we have seen, no express law against so early an exer-
cise of the prophetic office; neither do I, so decidedly as Cludius*,
hold it improbable that so young a preacher of repentance should
make an impression, or even that lie should be taken for a propliet
of the olden time-an Elias; I will only appeal to tlie ordinary
course of tilings as a sanction for presuming, tliat one who entered
so much earlier upon tlie scene of action was proportionately older,
especially wlien tlie principles and spirit of his teaching tell so plainly
of a mature age as do tlie discourses of John. There are exceptions
to this rule; but the statement of Luke (i. 26.), tliat John was only
six months older than Jesus, is insufficient to establish one in tins

DELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   215

instance, as it accords with the interest of the poetical legend, and
must therefore be renounced for the slightest .improbability.

The result then of our critique on the chronological data Luke
iii. 1. 2. comp. 23. and i. 26. is this: if Jesus, as Luke seems to
understand, appeared in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, tlie appear-
ance of John occurred, not in the same year, but earlier; and if
Jesus was in his thirtieth year when he began his ministry, the
Baptist, so much his predecessor, could hardly be but six months
his senior.

§ 45. APPEARANCE AND DESIGN OF THE BAPTIST-HIS PERSONAL
RELATIONS WITH JESUS.

JOHN, a Nazarite, according to our authorities (Matt. iii. 4. ix.
14. xi. 18. Luke i. 15.), and in the opinion of several theologians,*
an Essene, is said by Luke (iii. 2.) to have been summoned to his
public work by the word of God p'^a Oeov, which came to him in
the wilderness.   Not possessing tlie Baptist's own declaration, we
cannot accept as complete the dilemma stated by Paulus,f when he
says, that we know not whether Jolin himself interpreted some ex-
ternal or internal fact as a divine call, or whether he received a sum-
mons from another individual; and we must add as a third possibil-
ity, that his followers sought to dignify the vocation of their Teacher
by an expression which recalls to mind the ancient Prophets.

While from tlie account of Luke it appears that the divine call
came to John in the wilderness, ev ry ep^y, but that for the pur-
pose of teaching and baptizing he resorted to the country about
Jordan, mpi^upog rov 'lopSuvov (ver. 3.); Matthew (iii. ff.) makes
the wilderness of Judea the scene of his labours, as if the Jordan in
which he baptized flowed through that wilderness. It is true that,
according to Joseplms, tlie Jordan before emptying itself into the
Dead Sea traverses a great wilderness, VO\\T(V Kprifiiav,^ but this
was not the wilderness of Judea, wliich lay farther south. § Hence
it has been supposed that Matthew, misled by his application of the
prophecy, the voice of one crying in the wilderness, (f>wvfj ftoGivTog
ev ry ep^y, to John, who issued from the wilderness of Judea,
epypog rf^ 'lovSaiaS, placed there his labours as a preacher of repent-
ance and a baptizer, although their true scene was tlie blooming valley
of tlie Jordan. ||   In the course of Luke's narrative, however, this
evangelist ceases to intimate that John forsook the wilderness after
receiving his call, for on the occasion of John's message to Jesus,
he makes the latter ask, Whom went ye out into the, wilderness to
see ? 61 E^rftvOare EM- TT]V ep^ov OsdvaaOal (vii. 24.). Now as the

* Stiiudlin, Geschichte der Sittenlehre Jesu, 1, S. 580. Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1 a
& 136. Comp. also Creuzer, Symbolik, 4, S. 413 ff.   f Ut sup. p. 347.   f Bril. jud'
iii. x. 7.   § See Winer, bibl. Kealworterbuch, A. Waste. Schneckenburger, uber den
Ursprung des ersten kanonischen Evangeliums, S. 39.
-la c                                        '

j| Schneckenburger, ut sup. S.

216 THE LIFE Of JESUS.

vallev of the Jordan in the vicinity of the Dead Sea was in fact a

barren plain, the narrow margin of the river excepted, no greater
mistake may belong to Matthew than that of specifying the wilder-
ness as tlie eprifzoi; T'/JC 'lov6aiai;; and even that may be explained
away by the supposition, either that John, as lie alternately preached
and baptized, passed from the wilderness of Judea to the borders of
the Jordan,* or that the waste tract through which that river flowed,
being a continuation of the wilderness of Judea, retained the same
name.f

The baptism of John could scarcely have been derived from the
baptism of proselytes, f for this rite was unquestionably posterior to
the rise of Christianity. It was more analogous to the religious
lustrations in practice amongst the Jews, especially the Essenes,
and was apparently founded chiefly on certain expressions used by
several of the prophets in a figurative sense, but afterwards under-
stood literally. According to these expressions, God requires from
the Israelitish people, as a condition of their restoration to his favour,
a washing and purification from their iniquity, and lie promises that
he will himself cleanse them with water (Isa. i. 16. Ez. xxxvi. 25.
comp. Jer. ii. 22). Add to this tlie Jewish notion that the Messiah
would not appear with his kingdom until the Israelites repented, §
and we have the combination necessary for the belief that an ablu-
tion, symbolical of conversion and forgiveness of sins, must precede
the advent of the Messiah.

Our accounts are not unanimous as to the signification of John's
baptism. They all, it is true, agree in stating repentance, iiETavoia,
to be one of its essential requirements; for even what Josephus says
of the Baptist, that lie admonished tlie Jews, practising virtue,
just towards each other, and devout towards G-od, to come to his
baptism, ^perfjv eTTaunovvrw;, ical ~y TTpog d.AA'qX,ov(; Sinaioavv-y nal npof
rov Oeov evasQeia ^pufisvovi; paT!Tiap,w avvisvcn, [| lias the same sense
under a Greek form. Mark and Luke, however, while designating
the baptism of John ftdrrTiafia fieravoia^, add, £({• a<f>eaiv dfiapTt.&v (i. 4.
in. 3). Matthew has not the same addition; but he, with Mark,
describes the baptized as confessing their sins, ^o^oXo-yovfievoi. rag
apapria^ avruv (iii. 6.) Joseplius, on tlie other hand, appears in
direct contradiction to them, when he gives it as the opinion of the
Baptist, that baptism is pleasing to G-od, not when we ask pardon
for some transgressions, but when we pzirify the body, after hav-
ing first purified the mind by righteousness, ovw yap not. TT]V
PanTt.ai.v aToSeitrrfv avru h-u Oecfi) ^avcZo-Odi, pj E-TI rivuv a^apTd'^uv
wapaTriaei %pu^e.vuv, d/U' s(j)' ayveia rov o&ya-oc, are. Sfj Kal rr^ ^v^
SiKaioavvg •npwKKenaQapy.svr^. We might here be led to the suppo-
sition that tlie words for the remission of sins, ei? d^eaiv af.i.ap-Mv,
as in Acts ii. 38. and other passages, was commonly used in relation

* Winer, ut sup. S. G31.   f Paulus, ut sup. S. 301.   t Scliiieckenburger, uher das
Alter der Jii]|isi:lii;a l'rosi;lytentaut'c.   §. Sanhcdr. f. xcvii. 3 : R. Elleser d'uit: si Isra'e-
litm vamttntiam anunf. tune un- Co'eirm Uberitntu.r; sin vero, noil liberantur.  Schottgen,

RELATIONS BETWEEN JiSSUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.

217

to Christian baptism, and was thence transferred unhistorically to
that of John; but as in the passages quoted from Ezekiel the wash-
ing typified not only reformation but forgiveness, the probabilities
are in favour of the evangelical statement. Moreover, it is possible
to reconcile Josephus and tlie Evangelists, by understanding the
words of the former to mean that the baptism of John was intended
to effect a purification, not from particular or merely Levitical trans-
gressions, but of the entire man, not immediately and mysteriously
through the agency of water, but by means of tlie moral acts of ref-
ormation.*

The several accounts concerning John are farther at variance, as
to the relation in which they place his baptism to the kingdom of
heaven, ftawrjeia TUV ovpavuv. According to Matthew, the concise
purport of the appeal with which he accompanied his baptism was,
JSepent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, p-eravoelTe rjyyuce
yap T[ paoiXsia r&v ovpavwv (iii. 2.) ; according to Luke, the Baptist
in the first instance mentions only repentance and remission of sins,
but no kingdom of heaven; and it is the conjecture of the people,
that he might be the Messiah, by which he is first led to direct them
to one wlio was coming after him (iii. 15 ft.). In Josephus, there is
no trace of a relation between the ministry of John and the Messianic
idea. Yet. we must not therefore conclude that the Baptist himself
recognized no such relation, and that its only source was the Chris-
tian legend. Tor the baptism of John, waiving the opinion that it
was derived from tlie baptism of proselytes, is not quite explicable
without a reference to the above-mentioned expiatory lustrations of
the people-lustrations which were to usher in tlie times of the Mes-
siah ; moreover, the appearance of Jesus is made more comprehen-
sible by the supposition, that John had introduced the idea of the
proximity of the Messiah's kingdom. That Josephus should keep
back the Messianic aspect of tlie fact, is in accordance with his gen-
eral practice, which is explained by the position of his people with
respect to the Romans. Besides, in the expression, to assemble for
baptism, pcnTTia{zu avvieval, in his mention of popular assemblages,
avarpe^eiyOal, and in the fear of Antipas lest John should excite a
revolt, dTroorao-t?, there lies an intimation of precisely such a religious
and political movement as the liopc of the Messiah was calculated
to produce. That the Baptist should so distinctly foretell the im-
mediate appearance of the Messiah's kingdom must create surprise,
and (Luke's reference to a divine call and revelation being held un-
satisfactory) might lead to the supposition that the Christian nar-
rator, believing that the true Messiah was actually manifested in the
person of Jesus, the cotemporary of John, gave to the language of
the latter a definiteness which did not belong to it originally; and
wliile tlie Baptist merely said, consonantly with tlie Jewish notion
already mentioned: Repent, that the kingdom of heaven may come,
ueravoelTe, 'iya ^6y T] f3aa. r. ovp., a later edition of bis words gave

218

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

yap (for) instead of Iva (thaf). But such a supposition is needless.
In tliose times of commotion, John'might easily believe that he dis-
cerned signs, which certified to him the proximity of the Messiah's
kingdom ; the exact degree of its proximity he left undecided.

According to tlie Evangelists, the coming of the kingdom of
heaven, paai^sia r&v ovpavuv, -was associated by John with a Mes-
sianic individual to whom he ascribed, in distinction from his own
baptism with water, a baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire,
ftaTTT^eiv TTvev^art. dyw nal -n-vpl (Matt. iii. 11. paralL), the outpour-
ing of the Holy Spirit being regarded as a leading feature of the
Messianic times (Joel ii. 28; Acts ii. 16 ff.) Of this personage lie
farther predicted, in imagery akin to that used by the prophets on
the same subject, that he would winnow the people as wheat (Mal.
iii. 2, 3. Zecli. xiii. 9.).   The Synoptical Gospels state tlie case
as if John expressly understood this Messianic individual to be Je-
sus of Nazareth. According to Luke, indeed, the mothers of these
two men were cousins, and aware of the destination of their sons.
The Baptist while yet unborn acknowledged the divinity of Jesus,
and all the circumstances imply that both were early acquainted
with their relative position, predetermined by a lieavenly communi-
cation. Mattliew, it is true, says nothing of such a family connexion
between John and Jesus; but when the latter presents himself for
baptism, lie puts into the mouth of John words which seem to pre-
suppose an earlier acquaintance. His expression of astonishment
that Jesus should come to him for baptism, when he had need to be
baptized of Jesus, could only arise from a previous knowledge or
instantaneous revelation of his character. Of the latter there is no
intimation ; for the first visible sign of the Messiahship of Jesus did
not occur till afterwards. While in the first and third Gospels (in
the second, tlie facts are so epitomized that the writers view on the
subject is not evident), John and Jesus seem to have been no stran-
gers to each other prior to the baptism; in the fourth, the Baptist
pointedly asserts that he knew not Jesus before the heavenly ap-
pearance, which, according to the Synoptical Gospels, was coincident
with l)is baptism (i. 31, 33.).  Simply considered, this looks like a
contradiction. By Luke, the previous acquaintance of tlie two is
stated objectively, as an external matter of fact; by Mattliew, it is
betrayed in the involuntary confession of the astonished Baptist; in
tlie fourth Gospel, on tlie contrary, their previous unacqnaintance is
attested subjectively, by his premeditated assertion. It was not,
therefore, a ve'"' farfetched idea of the Wolfenbiittel fragmentist, to
put down the contradiction to tlie account of John and Jesus, and
to presume that they had in fact long known and consulted each
other, but tliat in public (in order better to play into one another's
hands) they demeaned themselves as if they had hitherto been mut-
ual strangers, and each delivered an unbiassed testimony to the
other's excellence.*

* T^r.-li-rmpTit vnn ^PTTI Zwprltfl .Tftan nnd apinor Jfinnw hornnawoCT

EELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   219

That such premeditated dissimulation might not be imputed to
John, and indirectly to Jesus, it has been sought to disprove the
existence of the contradiction in question exegetically. What John
learned from the heavenly sign was the Messiahship of Jesus; to
this therefore, and not to his person, refer the words, I knew him
not, aayu OVK •y6eiv avrbv* But it may be questioned whether sucli
an acquaintance as John must have had with Jesus, presupposing
the narrative of Matthew and Luke, was separable from a knowledge
of his Messiahship. The connexion and intercourse of the two fam-
ilies, as described by Luke, would render it impossible for John not
to be early informed how solemnly Jesus had been announced as
the Messiah, before and at his birth: he could not therefore say at
a later period that, prior to the sign from heaven, he liad not known,
but only that he had not believed, the story of former wonders, one
of which relates to himself.f It being thus unavoidable to acknowl-
edge that by the above declaration in tlie fourth Gospel, the Baptist
is excluded, not only from a knowledge of tlie Messiahship of Je-
sus,. but also from a personal acquaintance with him ; it has been
attempted to reconcile the first chapter of Luke with this ignorance,
by appealing to the distance of residence between the two families,
as a preventive to tlie continuance of their intercourse. :j: But if the
journey from Nazareth to the hill country of Judea was not too
formidable for the betrothed Mary, how could it be so for tlie two
sons when ripening to maturity? What culpable indifference is
hereby supposed in both families to tlie heavenly communications
they had received! nay, what could be the object of those communi-
cations, if they had no influence on the early life and intercourse of
the two sons?§

Let it be granted that the fourth gospel excludes an acquaintance
witli the Messiahship only of Jesus, and tliat the tliird presupposes
an acquaintance with his person only, on the part of John; still the
contradiction is not removed. For in Matthew, John, when required
to baptize Jesus, addresses him as if he knew him, not generally
and personally alone, but specially, in his character of Messiah. It
is true that the words: I have need to be baptised of thee, and
comest thou to me ? (iii. 14.) have been interpreted, in the true
spirit of harmonizing, as referring to the general superior excellence
of Jesus, and not to his Messiahship. || But the right to undertake
the baptism which was to prepare the way for the Messiali's king-

* So thinks Semler in his answer to the above Fragments, in 'oc.; t3 think most of
the moderns; Plank, Geschichte des Christenthums in der Periode seiner Einfuhrang, 1,
K. 7. Winer, bibl. Kealworterb., 1, S, 691. f Let the reader judge for himself whether
NeAnder's arguments be not forced : "Even if the Baptist could have expected" (say
rather must necessarily have known) "from the circumstances of the birth of Jesus, that
he was the Messiah, the divine witness in his own mind would eclipse all external testi-
mony, and compared with this divine illumination, all previous knowledge would seem
ignorance." p. 68.   t Lucke, Commentar zum Evang. Johannis 1, S. 362.   § Osiander,
in despair, answers, that the heavenly communications themselves might contain directions
for-keeping the two youths apart! S. 127. || Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 1, S. 117 f. Pau-

220

THE LIFE OP JESUS.

dom, was not to be obtained by moral superiority in general, but
was conferred by a special call, such as Jolin himself had received,
and such as could belong only to a prophet, or to the Messiah and
his Forerunner (John i. 19 ff.) If then John attributed to Jesus
authority to baptize, he must have regarded him not merely as an
excellent man, but as indubitably a prophet, nay, since he lield him
worthy to baptize himself, as his own superior; that is, since John
conceived himself to be the Messiah's Forerunner, no other than
the Messiah himself. Add to this, that Matthew had just cited a
discourse of tlie Baptist, in which he ascribes to the coming Mes-
siah a baptism more powerful than his own; how then can we un-
derstand his subsequent language towards Jesus otherwise than
thus : "Of what use is my water baptism to tliee, 0 Messiah? Far
more do I need thy baptism of the Spirit !"*

The contradiction cannot be cleared away; we must therefore,
if we would not lay the burthen of intentional deception on the
agents, let the narrators bear the blame; and there will be the less
hindrance to our doing so, the more obvious it is how one or both
of them might be led into an erroneous statement. There is in the
present case no obstacle to the reconciliation of Matthew with the
fourth evangelist, farther than the words by which the Baptist seeks
to deter Jesus from receiving baptism; words wliicli, if uttered be-
fore the occurence of any thing supernatural, presuppose a knowl-
edge of Jesus in his character of Messiah. Now the Gospel of the
Hebrews, according to Epiplianius, places the entreaty of Jolin that
Jesus would baptize him, as a sequel to the sign from heaven ;f and
this account has been recently regarded as tlie original one, abridged
by the writer of our first Gospel, who, for tlie sake of effect, made
the refusal and confession of the Baptist coincident with tlie first
approach of Jesus. ^ But that we have not in the Gospel of the
Hebrews the. original form of the narrative, is sufficiently proved by
its very tedious repetition of tlie heavenly voice and the diffuse style
of the whole. It is rather a very traditional record, and tlie inser-
tion of John's refusal after tlie sign and voice from heaven, was not
made with the view of avoiding a contradiction of tlie fourth Gospel,
which cannot be supposed to have been recognized in the circle of
the Ebionite Christians, but from the very motive erroneously at-
tributed to Matthew in his alleged transposition, namely, to give
greater effect to the scene. A simple refusal on the part of the

* Comp. the Fragmcntist, ut sup.   •i" HaBres.xxx.l3: Ka; u{ u.vfi\9ev inro TOV
VOQ.TOC, ^wi^ijcav o[ ovpavoc, Kai el^e TO Trvcv^a TOV QEOV TO uyLov ev elSei TTFptOTi.^uc K. T. /..
nal (^}(-)V7/ i^'kVKTO K. T. A. K(U ei'i3vc Trfc-ptE'/a^'e TOV TOTTOV ^(JC p-Eya' ov Mail', i^jaiv. u 'l^uz'wjt;

^yyt arnJ ov Tit; u. Kvpie ; K(U •Ku\,iv f^wrJ a. r. ^.. Kal Tore, ^rjaiv, o '\ua.vv'f]c 7rffpan"£(Tti)V
avT^ ^sys &£0^ai aov KvfW, ai' ^s /5a7rncw. And vhen he came J'roin the water, the heav-
ens u'ere opened, and Ac --saw the holy spirit (if God in the form of a doi'e, <j'c., and a voice
wa» heard, <jx'., and immediately a great linhi illuminated the place; seeina which, John said
to Am, Who art thou, Lord? and again a voice, A'c.  And then, John fulling (it his feet,
said to him, I beseech thee. Lord, baptize me.   ^ Schneckeuburger, liber den Ursprung des
er'sten kanonischen Evangeliums, S. 121 f.; Lucke, Comm. z. Ev. Joli., 1, S. 3G1. Usteri,

EELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.

221

Baptist appeared too weak; he must at, least fall at the feet of Je-
sas; and a more suitable occasion could not be given than that of
the sign from heaven, which accordingly must be placed beforehand.
This Hebrew Gospel, therefore, will not help us to understand how
Matthew was led into contradiction with John; still less will it avail
for the explanation of Luke's narrative.

All is naturally explained by the consideration, that the impor-
tant relation between John and Jesus must have been regarded as
existing at all times, by reason of that ascription of pre-existence
to the essential which is a characteristic of the popular mind. Just
as the soul, when considered as an essence, is conceived more or
less clearly as pre-existent; so in tlie popular mind, every relation
pregnant with consequences is endowed with pre-existence. Hence
the Baptist, who eventually held so significant a relation to Je'sus,
must have known him from the first, as is indistinctly intimated by
Matthew, and more minutely detailed by Luke; according to whom,
their motliers knew each other, and the sons themselves were brought
together wliile yet unborn. All this is wanting in the fourth Gos-
pel, the writer of which attributes an opposite assertion to John,
simply because in his mind an opposite interest preponderated; for
the less Jesus was known to Jolin by whom lie was afterwards so
extolled, the more weight was thrown on the miraculous scene which
arrested the regards of the Baptist-the more clearly was his whole
position with respect to Jesus demonstrated to be the effect, not of
the natural order of events, but of the immediate agency of God.

§. 46. WAS JESUS ACKNOWLEDGED BY JOHN AS THE MESSIAH? AND
IN WHAT SENSE ?

TO the foregoing question whether Jesus was known to John
before the baptism, is attached another, namely, What did John
think of Jesus and his Messiahship ? The evangelical narratives are
unanimous in stating, that before Jesus had 'presented himself for
baptism, John had announced the immediate coming of One to
whom he stood in a subordinate relation; and the scene at the
baptism of Jesus marked him, beyond mistake, as the personage of
whom John was the forerunner. According to Mark and Luke, we
must presume that the Baptist gave credence to this sign; accord-
ing to the fourth Gospel, he expressly attested his belief (i. 34.),
and moreover uttered words which evince the deepest insight into
the higher nature and office of Jesus (i. 29 ff. 36; iii. 27 ff.); accord-
ing to the first Gospel, he was already convinced of these before the
baptism of Jesus. On the other hand, Matthew (xi. 2 ff.) and Luke
(vii. 18.) tell us that at a later period, the Baptist, on hearing of the
ministry of Jesus, despatched some of his disciples to him with the
inquiry, whether he (Jesus) was the promised Messiah, or whether
another musi be expected.

222 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

The first impression from this is, that the question denoted an
uncertainty on tlie part of the Baptist whether Jesus were really
the Messiah ; and so it was early understood.* But such a doubt
is in direct- contradiction with all the other circumstances reported
by tlie evangelists. It is justly regarded as psychologically impos-
sible that lie whose belief was originated or confirmed by the bap-
tismal sign, which he held to be a divine revelation, and who after-
wards pronounced so decidedly on tlie Messianic call and tlie superior
nature of Jesu.?, should all at once have become unsieady in his con-
viction ; lie must then indeed have been like a reed sliaken by the
wind, a comparison which Jesus abnegates on this very occasion
(Matt. xi. 7.). A cause for such vacillation is in vain souglit in the
conduct or fortunes of Jesus at the time; for the rumor of the, works
of Christ, t'pya rov Xptff-ov, which in Luke's idea were miracles,
could not awaken doubt in tlie Baptist, and it was on tills rumour
that he sent Ins message. Lastly, how could Jesus subsequently
(John v. 33. ft.) so confidently appeal to the testimony of tlie Bap-
tist concerning liirn, wlien it was known that John liimself was at
last perplexed about his Messiahship ?f

Hence it lias been attempted to give a different turn to tlie facts,
and to show tliat Jolin's inquiry was not made on his own account,
but for tlie sake of his disciples, to overcome in them tlie doubt
with which lie was himself untainted. ^ Hereby it. is true, tlie above-
named difficulties are removed; in particular it is explained why the
Baptist should contrive to send this message precisely on hearing
of the miracles of Jesus: he plainly hoping that his disciples, who
had not believed his testimony to the Messiahship of Jesus, would
be convinced of its truth by beholding tlie-marvellous works of the
latter. But how could John hope that his envoys would chance to
find Jesus in tlie act of working miracles ? According to Matthew,
indeed, they did not so find him, and Jesus appeals (v. 4.) only to
his former works, many of wliich they liad seen, and of which they
might hear wherever lie liad presented himself. Luke alone, in
giving his evidently second-hand narrative,§ misconstrues the words
of Jesus to require tliat tlie. disciples of Jolm should have found
him in the exercise of his supernatural power. Further, if it had
been tlie object of tlie Baptist to persuade his disciples by a sight
of the works of Jesus, he would not have charged them with a
question wliich could be answered by the mere words, the authentic
declaration of Jesus. For he could not hope by the assertion of
tlie person whose Messiahship was the very point in debate, to con-
vince the disciples wnom his own declaration, in other cases, au-

* Tertull. adv. Marcion, iv. 18. Comp. Bengel, historico-exegetical remarks in Matt.
xi. 2-19, in his Archiv. 1, iii. p. 754 ff. ^ See Paulus, Kuinol. in loc. Bimgel, ut sup.
p 763. ^ Calvin, Comm. in harm. ex. Matth., Marc. et Luc. in loc.  § We agree with
Schleiermacher, (uher den Lukas, S. 106 f) in thus designating the narrative of the third
evangelist, first, on account of tile idle repetition of tlie Baptist's words, ver. 20 ; secondly
on account of the mistake in ver. 18 and 21, of which we shall presently treat, and to
which ver. 29. 30. seem to betrav a similar one.

RELATIONS BETWEEN JE8US AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   223

thoritative, had failed to satisfy.   On the whole, it would have
been a singular course in the Baptist to lend his own words to tlie
doubts of others, and thereby, as Schleiermacher well observes, to
compromise his early and repeated testimony in favour of Jesus.
It is clear tliat Jesus understood tlie question proposed to him by
the messengers as proceeding from Jolin himself; (a^ayyei,Xars 'lu-
awy, Matt. xi. 4;) and he indirectly complained of the want of faith
in the latter by pronouncing those blessed who were not offended
in him (ver. 6).*

If then it must be granted tliat John made his inquiry on his
own behalf, and not on tliat of his disciples, and if nevertheless we
cannot impute to him a sudden lapse into doubt after his previous
confidence ; notliing remains but to take the positive, instead of tlie
negative side of the question, and to consider its scepticism as tlie
mere garb of substantial encouragement, f On this interpretation,
the time which Jesus allowed to escape without publicly manifest-
ing himself as tlie Messiah, seemed too tedious to John in his im-
prisonment; lie sent therefore to inquire how long Jesus would allow
himself to be waited for, how long lie would delay winning to him-
self the better part of tlie people by a declaration of his Messiah-
ship, and striking a decisive blow against the enemies of his cause,
a blow that might even liberate the Baptist from his prison. But
if the Baptist, on tlie strength of his belief that Jesus was tlie Mes-
siah, hoped and sued for a deliverance, perhaps miraculous, by him
from prison, he would not clothe in tlie language of doubt an en-
treaty which sprang out of his faith. Now the inquiry in our evan-
gelical text is one of unmixed doubt, and encouragement must be
foisted in, before it can be found there. How great a violence must
be done to tlie words is seen by tlie way in which Schleiermacher
handles them in accordance with this interpretation. Tlie dubita-
tive question, ov el b Ep^6^evo(; ; he changes into tlie positive as-
sumption, thou art he who was to come; the other still more. em-
barrassing interrogatory, -y Srepov rrpoffSoKQjzev; he completely trans-
figures tlius: wherefore {seeing that thou per forrnest so great works)
do we yet await thee t/-shall not John wit/i all his authority
command, through us, all those who have partaken of his baptism
to obey thee as the Messiah, and be attentive to thy signs?  Even
if we allow, with Neander, the possibility of truth to tills interpre-
tation, a mere summons to action will not accord witli tlie earlier
representation of Jesus given by tlie Baptist. Tlie two enunci-
ations are at issue as to form; for if John doubted not the Messiah-
ship of Jesus, neither could he doubt his better knowledge of tlie
fitting time and manner of his appearance : still farther are they at
issue as to matter; for tlie Baptist could not take offence at what is
termed tlie delay of Jesus in manifesting himself as tlie Messiah, or
wish to animate him to bolder conduct, if he retained his early view

• Compare Calvin in loc. and Bsn^el ut sun. S. 7fi3 flf * Th,..

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

224

of the destination of Jesus. If he still, as formerly, conceived Jesus
to be the Lamb of God that 'tatseth away the. sins of the zoorld,
b afwov; rov Qsov, b a'tpuv rfjv ay-apnav rov noopov, no thought could
occur to him of a blow to be struck by Jesus against his enemies,
or in general, of a violent procedure to be crowned by external con-
quest ; rather, the quiet path which Jesus trod must appear to him
the right one-the path befitting the destination of the Lamb of
God. Thus if the question of John conveyed a mere summons to

action, it contradicted his previous views.

These expedients failing, the original explanation returns upon
us; namely, that the inquiry was an expression of uncertainty re-
specting the messianic dignity of Jesus, which had arisen in the
Baptist's own mind; an explanation which even Neander allows to
be the most natural. This writer seeks to account for the transient
apostacy of the Baptist from the strong faith in which he gave his
earlier testimony, by the supposition that a dark hour of doubt had
overtaken the man of God in his dismal prison; and he cites in-
stances of men who, persecuted for their Christian faith or other con-
victions, after having long borne witness to the truth in the face of
death, at length yielded to human weakness and recanted. But on
a closer examination, he has given a false analogy. Persecuted
Christians of the first centuries, and, later, a Berengarius or a Ga-
lileo, were false to the convictions for which they were imprisoned,
and by abjuring which they hoped to save themselves: the Baptist,
to be compared with them, should have retracted his censure of
Herod, and not have shaken his testimony in favour of Christ, which
had no relation to his imprisonment. However that may be, it is
evident here that these doubts cannot have been preceded by a

state of certainty.

We come again to tlie difficulty arising from the statement of

Matthew that John sent his two disciples on hearing of the works
of Christ, duowac; rd 'epya TOV Xpiffi-ov, or as Luke lias it, because
his disciples showed him of all these things, dm;y-yei/lav -n-spi -ndvruv
rovrwv. The latter evangelist has narrated, immediately before, the
raising of the widow's son, and the healing of the centurion's ser-
vant. Could John, then, believe Jesus to be the Messiah before he
had performed any messianic works, and be seized with doubt when
he began to legitimatize his claim by miracles such as were expect-
ed from the Messiah ?* This is so opposed to all psychological
probability, that I wonder Dr. Paulus, or some other expositor vers-
ed in psychology and not timid in verbal criticism, has not started
the conjecture that a negative has slipped out of Matt. xi. 2, and
that its proper reading is, 6 6e 'luiavvi](; OVK duov.aat; ev TU 6ea{iUT'i]pl(f>
ra 'epya TOV Xpicn-ov, K. T. A,. It might then be conceived, that John
had indeed been convinced, at a former period, of the Messiahship
of Jesus ; now, however, in his imprisonment, the works of Jesus
--_„ „„ i^^.^ +„ i,;a para. and imaErinina: him inactive, he was as-

EELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   225

sailed with doubt. But had John been previously satisfied of the
Messiahship of Jesus, the mere want of acquaintance with his mira-
cles could not have unhinged his faith. The actual cause of John's
doubt, however, was the report of these miracles;-a state of the
case which is irreconcileable with any previous confidence.

Bat how could he become uncertain about tlie Messiahship of
Jesus, if he had never recognized it ? Not indeed in. the sense of
beginning to suspect that Jesus was not the Messiah; but quite
possibly in the sense of beginning to conjecture that a man of such
deeds was the Messiah.

We have here, not a decaying, but a growing certainty, and. this
discrimination tlirows light on tlie whole purport of the passages in
question. John knew nothing of Jesus before, but that he had, like
many others, partaken of his baptism, and perhaps frequented the
circle of his disciples ; and not until after tlie imprisonment of the
Baptist did Jesus appear as a teacher, and worker of miracles. Of
this John heard, and then arose in his mind a conjecture, fraught
with hope, that as he had announced the proximity of the Messiah's
kingdom, this Jesus miglit be he wlio would verify his idea.*   So
interpreted, this message of the Baptist excludes his previous testi-
mony ; if lie had so spoken formerly, he could not have so inquired
latterly, and vice versa. It is our task, therefore, to compare the
two contradictory statements, that we may ascertain which has more
traces than tlie other, of truth or untruth.

The most definite expressions of John's conviction that Jes.us
was the Messiah are found in the fourth Gospel, and these suggest
two distinct questions: first, whether it be conceivable that John
had such a notion of the Messiah as is therein contained; and,
secondly, whether it be probable that he believed it realized in the
person of Jesus.

With respect to the former, the fourth Gospel makes the Bap-
tist's idea of the Messiah include the characteristics of expiatory
suffering, and of a premundane, heavenly existence. It has been
attempted, indeed, so to interpret the expressions with which he
directs his disciples to Jesus, aa to efface tlie notion of expiatory
suffering. Jesus, we are told, is compared to a lamb on account of
his meekness and patience; alpeiv Tffv ayLapnav TOV nooy.ov, is to be
understood either of a patient endurance of the world's malice, or
of an endeavour to remove the sins of the world by reformins; it;

and tlie sense of the Baptist's words is this: "How moving is it
that this meek and gentle Jesus should have undertaken so difficult
and painful an office !"f But the best critics have shown that even

* The gospel writers, after what they had narrated of the relations between Jesus
and the Baptist, of coarse understood the question to express doubt, whence probably v.
6 (Matt.) and v. 23 (Luke) came in this connection. Supposing these passages authentic,
they suggest another conjecture ; viz. that Jesus spoke in the foregoing verses of spiritual
miracles, and that the Baptist was perplexed by the absence of corporeal ones. The
UKOvaas TU Spya T, X, must then be set down to the writer's misapprehension of the es-

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

226

if alpeiv by itself might; bear this interpretation, still c/ivb?, not
merely with the article but with the addition rov QEOV, must signify,
not a Iamb in general, but a special, holy Lamb; and if, as is most
probable, this designation has reference to Isai. liii. 7., a'ipsi-v rf]v
djiaprlav can only be expounded by wliat is there predicated of tlie
lamblike servant of God, that he Tag apapriac; •r\\iw> (pepsi, nal •n-Epi
•qfJi&v oSwarai (V. 4, LXX.), words which must signify vicarious
suffering.* Now that tlie Baptist should have referred the above
prophetic passage to the Messiah, and hence liave thought of him as
suffering, lias been recently held more than doubtful. +

For so foreign to the current opinion, at least, was this notion
of tlie Messiah, that tlie disciples of Jesus, during the wliole period
of their intercourse with him, could not reconcile them selves to it;

and. wlien his death had actually resulted, their trust in him as the
Messiah was utterly confounded (Luke xxiv. 20 ff.). How, then,
could the Baptist, who, according to tlie solemn declaration of Jesus,
Matt. xi. 11., confirmed by the allusions in the Gospels to his strict
ascetic life, ranked below the least in tlie kingdom of heaven, to
which the apostles already belonged-how could this alien discern,
long before tlie sufferings of Jesus, that they pertained to the
character of the Messiah, when the denizens were only taught the
same lesson by tlie issue ? Or, if the Baptist really had sucli in-
sight, and communicated it to his disciples, wliy did it not, by means
of those wlio left his circle for that of Jesus, win an entrance into
the latter-nay, why did it not, by means of the great credit which
John enjoyed, mitigate the offence caused by tlie death of Jesus, in
tlie public at large ?f Add to this, that in none of our accounts of
the Baptist, with the exception of the fourth Gospel, do we find
that he entertained such views of the Messiah's character; for, not
to mention Josephus, the Synoptical Gospels confine his representa-
tion of the Messianic office to the spiritual baptism and winnowing
of the people.  Still it remains possible that a penetrating mind,
like that of the Baptist, might, even before tlie death of Jesus,
gather from Old Testament- phrases and types tlie notion of a suf-
fering Messiah, and that his obscure hints on the subject might not
be comprehended by his disciples and cotemporaries.

Thus the above considerations are not decisive, and we there-
fore turn to tlie expressions concerning tlie pi-cmundane existence
and heavenly origin of tlie Messiah, with the question: Could the
Baptist have really held such tenets ? That from tlie words, John
i. 15, 27, 30: He that cmneth after m£ is preferred before me.; for
/ie was before me, 6 o-iau p.ov ep^opevot; 'EpTTpoaOiv p.ov yeyovev, STI
vpuTog [tov iyVy notliing but dogmatical obstinacy can banish the
notion of pre-existence, is seen by a mere glance at such expositions
as this of Paulus: "He wlio in the course of time comes after me;

• De Wette, de morte Christi expiatoria, in his Opusc. theol, S. 77 ft. Lucke, Comm.
-"~ If.,,. .LA. 1 s. .1.17 ff. Winar. liilil. Kealworterbuch 1, S, 693, Anm,  •{• Gabler nail

RELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   227

has so appeared in my eyes, ^irpoaQiv fwv, that he (Sri-uare,
premiss-conclusion!) deserves rather from his rank and character
to be called the-first."* With preponderating arguments more un-
prejudiced commentators have maintained, that the reason here
given why Jesus, wlio appeared after tlie Baptist in point of time,
liad the precedence of him in dignity, is tlie pre-existence of tlie
former. + We have here obviously the favourite dogma of the fourth
evangelist, the eternal pre-existence of the /loyoc, present indeed to
tlie mind of tliat writer, who liad just been inditing his proem, but
that it was also present to tlie mind of tlie Baptist is another ques-
tion. The most recent expositor allows that the sense in which the
evangelist intends r^puToi; ^wv, must have been very remote from the
Baptist's point of view, at least so far as the ^.oyot; is concerned.
Tlie Baptist, he thinks, Iield tlie popular Jewish notion of the pre-
existence of tlie Mcssiali, as the subject of tlie Old Testament
theoplianies.t There are traces of this Jewish notion in the writings
of Paul (e. g. 1 Cor. x. 4. Col. i. 15 f.) and tlie rabbins ;§ and
allowing tliat it was of Alexandrian origin, as Bretschneider argues, ||
we may yet ask whether even before tlie time of Christ, the Alexan-
drian-Judaic theology may not have modified the opinions of the
mother country ?^ Even these expressions then, taken alone, are not
conclusive, altliougli it begins to appear suspicious that tlie Baptist,
otherwise conspicuous for exhibiting the practical side of the idea
of tlie Messiali's kingdom, should have ascribed to him by the fourth
evangelist solely, two notions which at tliat time undoubtedly
belonged only to tlie deepest messianic speculations; and tliat tlie
form in which tliose notions are expressed is too peculiarly that of
the writer, not to be put to his account.

We arrive at a more decisive result by taking into examination
the passage John iii. 27-36, where Jolin replies to the complaints
of his disciples at the rival baptism of Jesus, in a way that reduces
all commentators to perplexity. After showing how it lay at the
foundation of their respective destinies, which he desired not to
overstep, tliat he must decrease, while Jesus must increase, he
proceeds (ver. 31) to use forms of expression precisely similar to
those in which tlie evangelist makes Jesus speak of himself, and in
winch he delivers his own thoughts concerning Jesus. Our most
recent, commentator** allows that this discourse of John seems tlie
eclio of tlie foregoing conversation between Jesus and Nicodemus.ft

* Parlus, Leben Jesu, 2, a, die Uebers. S. 29. 31.   f Tholuck and Luke, in loc,
^ Lucke, ut sup. § See Bertholdt, Christologia Judaeorum Jesu apostolorumque sctate, §
'23-26.   [I Prol.aLilia, p.-11,   ^ See Gfrorer, Philo und die Alexandr. Theosophie,
part ii. p. 180. ** Lucke, ut sup. p. 500.
ft Compare especially :

Job. iii, 11 (Jesu to Xicodemus): ufit/v,
"W, ic.'yu O«M, on o a'tSa/.iev, ^.a?.ovftfv Kal
o supu.it.a/.iev, ftaprvpovfisv- nal TT/V p.apTvplav

Joh. iii. 33 (the Baptist): Kal 6 tupanc aw.
i}Kovae, TOVTO /.taprvpcl <cat T^r fMfmipiav
avTov ovSetc ^afipuvei.

V. 36 : <5 mavcvuv ell; r&v olSv isyi !,wfv

Ctltiivusir A ^f i\'!rfi'f^i~m 'rt"\ vil,~s  /ti'if wl.wfsi

ilfiiiv ov '^aftjuveTs.

V. 18 : 6 niffrsvuv elf; avrov ov KpiveTOt'

6 6e ^ TTifJTEVUV^ ^6?J K€Kl>iT(U OTf W 3T&-

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

228

The expressions in the speech lent to the Baptist are peculiarly

those of the apostle John; for instance, afpayi^m (to seal), papTVpia
(testimony), the antithesis of dvwOev and EK. T^ •ygc (from above and
of the earth), the phrase t'^etv ^wqv aluvwv (to have eternal life);

and. the question presents itself: Is it more probable tliat the
evangelist, as well as Jesus, in whose mouth these expressions are
so often put, borrowed them from tlie Baptist, or that the evangelist
lent them (I will only at present say) to the latter ? This must be
decided by the fact that the ideas, to which the Baptist here gives
utterance, lie entirely within the domain of Christianity, and belong
specially to the Christianity of the apostle John. Take for example
that antithesis of avu (from above), and EK -rg<- y^ (of the earth),
the designation of Jesus as aruOev epXoftevo^ (lie that cometh from
above), as 'ov aveorei.Xs.v b Qeb(; (he -whom God had sent), who con-
sequently TO. p^-tara rov QEOV XaXsl (speaketh the words of God),
tlie relation of Jesus to God as the vwc; (son), whom 6 Tra-ffp dya-ro
(the Father loveth):-what can be characteristic of Christianity,
and of the Apostle John's mode of presenting it, if these ideas are
not so ? and could they belong to the Baptist ?  Christianismits
ante Christum! And then, as Olshauscn well observes,* is it
consistent for John, who, even on the fourth evangelist's own show-
ing, remained separate from Jesus, to speak of the blessedness of a
believing union with him ? (v. 33 and 36.)

Thus much then is certain, and lias been acknowledged by the
majority of modern commentators: tlie words v. 31-36, cannot
have been spoken by the Baptist. Hence theologians have con-
cluded, that the evangelist cannot have intended to ascribe them to
him, but from v. 31 speaks in his own person."|' This sounds
plausible, if they can only point out any mark of division between
the discourse of the Baptist and the addenda of the evangelist. But
none such is to be found. It is true that the speaker from v. 31.
•uses tlie third person, and not the first as in v, 30., when referring
to the Baptist: but in the former passage the Baptist is no longer
alluded to directly and individually, but as one of a class, in which
case lie must, though himself tlie speaker, choose the third person.
Thus there is no definitive boundary, and tlie speech glides imper-
ceptibly from those passages which might have been uttered by tlie
Baptist, into those which are altogether incongruous with his posi-
tion ; moreover from v. 30. Jesus is spoken of in tlie present tense,
as the evangelist might represent tlie Baptist to speak daring tlie
lifetime of Jesus, but could not in his own person have written after
the death of Jesus. In other passages, when presenting his own, re-

viaTcvuev els TO ovofia TOV fiovoyevovf vlov    i,wiv, u.W ff opyi) TOD Qsw fisvel tn' avrw.

TOV 9eou»

Comp. also the words of the Paptist v. 31, with Joh. iii. C. 12 f. viii. 23; V. 32 withviil.

26; T. 33 with vi. 27; Y, 34 with xii. 49, 60 ; v. 35 with v. 22, 27. x. 28 f. xvii. 2.

* Bibl. Comm. 2, p. 10.'">.

•t' Paulua, Olshausen, in loc.

RELATIONS BETWEEN JESL'S AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   229

flections concerning Jesus, lie uses the preterite.* Thus, grammati-
cally, tlie Baptist continues to speak from v. 31, and yet, histori-
cally, it is impossible tliat lie should have uttered the sequel; a con-
tradiction not to be solved, if it be added tliat, dogmatically, the
evangelist cannot liave ascribed to tlie Baptist words wliich he never
really pronounced. Now if we do not clioose to defy the clear rules
of grammar, and tlie sure data of liistory, for the sake of the vision-
ary dogma of inspiration, we sliall rather conclude from tlie given
premises, witli tlie author of tlie Probabilia, that the evangelist false-
ly ascribes tlie language in question to tlie Baptist, putting into his
mouth a Christology of his own, of wliich tlie latter could know
nothing.  Tilis is no more than Luckef confesses, though not quite
so frankly, when he says that the reflections of the evangelist are
here more tlian equally mixed witli tlie discourse of tlie Baptist, m
such a way as to be undistinguishable.  In point of fact, however,
the reflections of the evangelist are easily to be recognized; but of
the fundamental ideas of tlie Baptist there is no trace, unless they
arc souglit for witli a good will wliich amounts to prejudice, and to
wliicli therefore we make no pretension.  If tlien we have a proof
in tlie passages just considered, that tlie fourth evangelist did not
hesitate to lend to the Baptist messianic and other ideas which were
never his; we may lience conclude retrospectively concerning the
passages on wliich we formerly suspended our decision, that the
ideas expressed in them of a suffering and pre-existcnt Messiah be-
longed, not to tlie Baptist, but to the evangelist.

In giving the above reply to our first question, we have, in
strictness, answered tlie remaining one; for if the Baptist had no
such messianic ideas, he could not refer them to the person of Jesus.
But to strengthen tlie evidence for the result already obtained, we will
make tlie second question the object of a special examination. Ac-
cording to tlie fourth evangelist tlie Baptist ascribed to Jesus all the
messianic attributes above discussed. If he did this so enthusiasti-
cally, publicly, and repeatedly, as we road in John, he could not
have been excluded by Jesus from tlie kingdom of heaven (Matt.
xi. 11.), nor have been placed below tlie least of its citizens. For
such a confession as tliat of tlie Baptist, when lie calls Jesus the
vi6g TOV Qeov, who was before him,-such refined insight into the
messianic economy, as is sliown by his designating Jesus 6 ay.v'b^
TOV QEOV, b aipw rijv dfiapTlav rov Koaflov, Peter himself had not to
produce, though Jesus not only receives him into tlie kingdom of
heaven for his confession, Matt. xvi. 16., but constitutes him the
rock on wliich that kingdom was to be founded.   But we have
something yet more incomprehensible. John, in tlie fourth Gospel,
gives it as tlie object of his baptism, 'iva ipavepuOy (Jesus as Mes-
siah) TU 'I(Tpar)/l (i. 31.), and acknowledges it to be the divine ordi-
nance, that by the side of the increasing Jesus, lie must decrease

rock on wliich that kingdom was to be founded.

* E. g. here, v. 32, it is said: rf/v fiapTvpiav avrov ouoeif ^afifim'ci, but in the Pro-

230

THE LIFE OF JESU8.

(iii. 30.); nevertheless after Jesus had begun to baptize by the in-
strumentality of his disciples, John continues to practise his baptism
(iii. 32.). "Why so, if he knew the object of his baptism to be ful-
filled by tlie introduction of Jesus, and if he directed his followers
to him as the Messiah ? (i. 36 f.).* The continuance of his baptism
would be to no purpose; for Liikc's supposition, tliat John's bap-
tism was still of effect in those places where Jesus had not appeared,
lie himself overthrows by tlie observation, that at least at tlie period
treated of in John iii. 22 ft., Jesus and John must have been bap-
tizing near to each other, since tlie disciples of Jolin were jealous of
the concourse to tlie baptism of Jesus. But tlie continuance of
Jolin's baptism appears even to counteract his aim, if tliat aim were
merely to point out Jesus as the Messiah.  He thereby detained a
circle of individuals on tlie borders of tlie Messiah's kingdom, and
retarded or hindered their going over to Jesus (and tliat tlirougli his
own fault, not theirs alonc,t for lie nullified Ills verbal direction to
Jesus by his contradictory example). Accordingly we find tlie party
of John's disciples still existing in the time of the Apostle Paul
(Acts xvlii. 24 f. xix. 1 ft.); and, if tlie Sabeeans are to be credited
concerning their own history, tlie sect remains to this day.} Cer-
tainly, presupposing tlie averred conviction of tlie Baptist relative
to Jesus, it would seem most natural for him to have attached him-
self to tlie latter; this, however, did not liappen, and lience we con-
dude tliat lie cannot have liad that conviction.S

But chiefly the character and entire demeanour of tlie Baptist
render it impossible to believe tliat he placed himself on tliat foot-
ing with Jesus, described by tlie fourth evangelist. How could the
man of tlie wilderness, tlie stern ascetic, wlio fed on locusts and
wild honey, and prescribed severe fasts to his disciples, tlie gloomy,
threatening preacher of repentance, animated with tlie spirit of Eli-
as-liow could lie form a friendship with Jesus, in every tiling his
opposite ? He must assuredly, with his disciples, have stumbled at
:thc liberal manners of Jesus, and have been hindered by them from
recognizing him as tlie Messiah. Notliing is more unbending tlian
ascetic prejudice; lie wlio, like the Baptist, esteems it piety to fast
and mortify the body, will never assign a higli grade in tilings di-
vine to him wlio disregards such asceticism. A mind witli narrow
views can never comprehend one whose vision takes a wider range, al-

* De Wette, de morte Christi expiatoria, in s. Opusc. theol. p. 81 ; biblische Dog-
matik, § 209 ; Winer, bilil. Kealworterlmch 1, S. 692.   f Neander, p. 7]'). This author
erroneously supposes thai. there is an indication of the Baptist having directed his disciples to
Jesus in Acts xviii. 25, wlu're it is said of Apollos: iSlSaaKCV unpifSut: TU. Trep/ rov K.vpiou,
imaru.u£VO(; TO ^aTTTiaint ^luuvvov. For on comparing the following chapter, we find that
raul had to teach the disciples of John, that Ly the Ep^o^evof announced by their master,
they were to understand Jesus ; whence it is clear that the things of the Lord expounded
by Apollos, consisted only in the messianic doctrine, purified by John into an expectation
of one who was to come, and that the more accurate instruction which lie received from
the Christians, Aqiiila and Priscilla, was the doctrine of its fullilment in the person of Je-
sus. t Gesenius, I'robeheft der Gruber'schen Encyclopiidie, d. A. Zabier. § Bretschnei-

EELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AM> JOHN THE BAPTIST.   231

though the latter may know how to do justice to its inferior; hence
Jesus could value and sanction John in his proper place, but the
Baptist could never give the precedence to Jesus, as he is reported
to have done in the fourth Gospel. The declaration of the Baptist
(John iii. 30.), that he must decrease, but Jesus must increase, is
frequently praised as an example of tlie noblest and sublimcst re-
signation.* The beauty of this representation we grant; but not
its truth. The instance would be a solitary one, if a man wliose
life liad its influence on the world's history, had so readily yielded
tlie ascendant, in his own sera, to one who came to eclipse him and
render him superfluous. Such a step is not less difficult for individ-
uals than for nations, and that not from any vice, as egotism or
ambition, so tliat an exception miglit be presumed (though not with-
out prejudice) in the case of a man like the Baptist; it is a conse-
quence of tliat blameless, limitation which, as we have already re-
marked, is proper to a low point of view in relation to a higher,
and which is all the more obstinately maintained if tlie inferior indi-
vidual is, like John, of a coarse, rugged nature. Only from tlie di-
vine point of view, or from tliat of an historian, bent on establishing
religious doctrines, could sucli tilings be spoken, and the fourth
evangelist has in fact put into the mouth of tlie Baptist the very
same thoughts concerning tlie relation between him and Jesus, that
the compiler of tlie 2nd book of Samuel has communicated, as his
own observation, on the corresponding relation between Saul and
David, f Competent judges have recently acknowledged that there
exists a discrepancy between tlie Synoptical Gospels and tlie fourth,
tlie blame of wliicli must be imputed to the latter:} and this opinion
is confirmed and strengthened by tlie fact, that tlie fourth evangelist
transforms tlie Baptist, into a totally different character from tliat in
wliicli lie appears in the Synoptical Gospels and in Joseplius; out
of a practical preacher lie makes a speculative christologist; out of
a hard and unbending, a yielding and self-renunciating nature.

Tlie style in which the scenes between John and Jesus (John i.
29 ff. 35 ff.) arc depicted, shows them to have originated partly in
the free composition of the imagination, partly in a remodelling of
the synoptical narratives with a view to tlie glorification of Jesus.
With respect to tlie former : Jesus is walking, v. 35, near to John;

in v. 29 lie is said to come directly to him ; yet on neither occasion
is there any account of an interview between tlie two. Could Jesus
really have avoided contact with the Baptist, tliat, there miglit be no
appearance of preconcerted action? This is Lampc's conjecture;

but it is tlie product of modern reflections, foreign to the time and
circumstances of Jesus. Or shall we suppose that the narrator,

* Greiling, Leben Jcsu von Nazaret, S. 132 f.

•)• 2 yam. iii. 1.

pini T^h TW
! t3''i"n la's'ph "b^'s f^ai

John iii. 80.

inslvov Scl avfuvciv.
^UE St i\aTTOvs9ai.

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

232

whether fortuitously or purposely, omitted known details ?   But
the meetings of Jesus and John must liave furnished him with pe-
culiarly interesting matter, so that, as Lucke allows,* his silence is
enigmatical. From our point of view the enigma is solved. The
Baptist had, in the evangelist's idea, pointed to Jesus as tlie Mes-
siah.   This, understood as a visible pointing, required that Jesus
should pass by or approach John; hence this feature was inserted
in tlie narrative : but the particulars of an actual meeting being un-
necessary, were, though very awkwardly, omitted. Tlie incident
of some disciples attaching themselves to Jesus in consequence of
the Baptist's direction, seems to be a free version of the sending of
two disciples by John from his prison. Thus, as in Matthew xi.
2, and Luke vii. 18, John despatches two disciples to Jesus witli
the dubitativc question, "Art thou he that should come ? " so in
the fourth Gospel he likewise sends two disciples to Jesus, but with
the positive assertion that he (Jesus) is the .Lamb of God, d[zvbc;

Qeov; as Jesus in the former case gives to the disciples, after the
delivery of their message, tlie direction: "Go and tell John the.
things ye, haw seen and heard," a eiSe-e nal rjnovaaTe : so in the
latter, he gives to the inquiry concerning Ids abode, tlie answer:

come and see, ^p^eaOe nal ISs-e. But wliilc in the synoptical gos-
pels tlie two disciples return to John, in the fourth, they permanently

attach themselves to Jesus.

From the foregoing considerations, it is inconceivable tliat John
should ever liave held and pronounced Jesus to be the Messiah: but
it is easy to show how a belief that he did so might obtain, without .
historical foundation.  According to Acts xix. 4, the apostle Paul
declares what seems sufficiently guaranteed by history, tliat John
baptized elg TOV ep'^o[ievov, and this coming Messiali, adds Paul, to
whom John pointed was Jesus (rov-es-iv eic; Xpiorbv ITJCTOW). This
was an interpretation of the Baptist's words by the issue; for Jesua
had approved himself to a great number of his cotemporaries, as the
Messiah announced by John. There was but a step to the notion
that the Baptist himself had, under tlie ep^o^ievo?, understood the
individual Jesus,-had himself the TOV-KOTIV, K. r. /I. in his mind;

a view which, however unhistorical, would be inviting to tlie early
Christians, in proportion to their wisli to sustain the dignity of Je-
sus by tlie authority of the Baptist, then very influential in the
Jewisli world, f  There was yet another reason, gathered from the

* Commentar, S. 330.   •(• The passage above quoted from the Acts gives us also
some explanation, why the fourth evangelist of all others should he solicitous to place the
Baptist in a more favourable relation to Jesus, than history allows us to conceive. Accord-
ing to v. 1 ff. there were persons in Ephesus who knew only of John's baptism, and were
therefore rebaptizcd by the apoatle Paul in tlie name of Jesus. Now an old tradition re-
presents the fourth gospel to have been written in Ephcsus (Irsencus adv. hasr. iii, ].). If
•we accept this, (and it is certainly correct in assigning a Greek locality for tlie composi-
tion of this Gospel,) and presuppose, in accordance with the intimation in the Acts, that
Ephesus was the seat of a number of the Baptist's followers, all of whom Paul could hardly
have converted; tlie endeavour to draw them over to Jesus would explain the remarkable

RELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   233

<

Old Testament. The ancestor of tlie Messiah, David, had likewise
in the old Hebrew legend a kind of forerunner in the person of Sa-
muel, wlio by order from Jehovah anointed him to be king over
Israel (1 Sam. xvi.), and aftenvards stood in the relation of a witness
to liis claims. If tlien it behoved the Messiali to liave a forerunner,
who, besides, was more closely characterized in the prophecy of
Malaclii as a second Elias, and if, historically, Jesus was preceded
by John, wliose baptism as a consecration corresponded to an anoint-
ing; tlie idea was not remote of conforming tlie relation between
John and Jesus to tliat between Samuel and David.

We might have decided witli tolerable certainty which of the
two incompatible statements concerning tlie relation between the
Baptist and Jesus is to be renounced as unhistorical, by tlie univer-
sal canon of interpretation, tliat where, in narratives having a ten-
dency to aggrandize a person or a fact, (a tendency which the Gospels
evince at every step,) two contradictory statements are found, tliat
which best corresponds to tills aim is tlie least historical; because
if, in accordance with it, tlie original fact had been so dazzling, it
is inconceivable tliat the other less brilliant representation should
afterwards arise; as here, if John so early acknowledged Jesus, it is
inexplicable how a story could be fabricated, wliicli reports him to
have been in doubt on tlie same subject at a very late period.  We
have, however, by a separate examination of tlie narrative in the
fourth gospel, ascertained tliat it is self-contradictory and contains
its own solution; hence our result, found independently of tlie above
canon, serves for its confirmation.

Meanwiiile tliat result is only tlie negative, tliat all which turns
upon tlie early acknowledgment of Jesus by John has no claim to
be received as historical; of tlie positive we know nothing, unless
the message out of prison, may be regarded as a clue to the truth,
and we must therefore subject this side of the matter to a separate
examination. We will not extend our arguments against tlie prob-
ability of an early and decided conviction on tlie part of tlie Baptist,
to a mere conjecture awakened in him at a later period that Jesus
was tlie Messiah; and therefore we leave uncontested tlie proper con-
tents of tlie narrative. But as regards the form, it is not to be con-
ceived witliout difficulty.  That tlie Baptist in prison, iv -n? 6eap.u-
TW"^, sliould liave information of tlie proceedings of Jesus; that he
should from tliat locality send liis disciples to Jesus; and tliat tliese, as
we are led to infer, sliould bring him an answer in liis imprisonment.

According to Josephus,* Herod imprisoned John from fear of
disturbances; allowing tills to be merely a joint cause with that given
by tlie evangelist, it is yet difficult to believe that to a man, one
motive of wliose imprisonment was to seclude him from his follow-
ers, his disciples sliould liave retained free access; although we cannot

remarked and discussed this, uber den Zweck der Evangelischen Geschichte und der Briefa
Joliannis S. 3 ff. 2-t f. Compare Hug. Einlcitung in das N. T. S. 190 3te Aiisg.
* Anti.i. win v o

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

234

prove it an impossibility that circumstances might favour the admis-
sion of certain individuals.  Now that the message was sent from
prison we learn from Matthew alone; Luke says nothing of it, although
he tells of the message.  We might hence, witli Schleicrmacher,*
consider Luke's account the true one, and the ^sff^u-^p^u of Matthew
an unhistorical addition. But that critic has himself very convinc-
ingly shown, from the tedious amplifications, partly betraying even
misunderstanding, which the narrative of Luke contains (vii. 20, 21,
29, 30), that Matthew gives tlie incident in its original, Luke in a
revised fonn.t It would indeed be singular if Mattliew liad supplied
the Seofzu-ripw when it was originally wanting; it is far more natural
to suppose that. Luke, wlio in tlic whole paragraph appears as a re-
viser, expunged tlie original mention of tlie prison.

In judging of Luke's motives for so doing, we are led to notice
tlie difference in tlie dates given by the evangelists for tlie imprison-
ment of John. Mattliew, witli whom Mark agrees, places it before
the public appearance of Jesus in Gahlee; for he gives it as tlie mo-
tive for tlie return of Jesus into that province (Matt. iv. 12; MaA
i, 14.).  Luke assigns no precise date to the arrest of the Baptist
(iii. 19 f.), yet it is to be inferred from his silence about tlie prison,
in connexion witli tlie sending of tlie two disciples, tliat he regarded
it as a later occurrence; but John expressly says, tliat after tlie first
passover attended by Jesus in Ills public character, John was not
yet cast into prison (iii. 24.). If it be asked, who is right? we answer
that there is something on the face of the account of tlie first evan-
gelist, which has inclined many commentators to renounce it in fa-
vour of tlie two last. Tliat Jesus, on tlic report of John's impris-
onment in Galilee by Herod Antipas, should have returned into the
dominions of tliat prince for the sake of safety, is, as Schneckcnbur-
gerwell maintains,:}: highly improbable, since there, of all places, he
was tlie least secure from a similar fate. But even if it be held
impossible to dissociate the dve^wprfaev {fie withdrew) from tlie con-
nate idea of seeking security, we may still ask whether, disregard-
ing tlie mistake in tlie motive, tlie fact itself may not be maintained.
Mattliew and Mark connect witli this journey into Galilee after
John's imprisonment, tlie commencement of tlie public ministry of
Jesus; and tliat this was consequent on tlie removal of tlie Baptist,
I am quite inclined to believe, For it is in itself tlie most natural
that the exit of the Baptist should incite Jesus to carry on in his stead
tlie preaching of ^iK~avoiEi-e ffyyute yap i] ftaaiXsia T&V ovpav&v ; and
the canon cited above is entirely in favour of Matthew. Ym if it be
asked which fiction best accords witli the aggrandizing spirit ot the^
Christian legend,-tliat of John's removal before tlie appearance of
Jesus, or tliat of tlicir having long laboured in conjunction ?-the
answer must be, the latter.  If he to whom tlie hero of a narrative
is superior disappears from the scene before tlie entrance of tlic latter,
the crowning opportunity for tlic hero to demonstrate his ascendancy

-- - -     .„,.   4. IT.].,,, ,]„„ TTranriin"- U. S. W. S. 79.

RELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   235

is lost-tlie full splendour of the rising sun can only be appreciated,
when the waning moon is seen above the horizon, growing paler and
paler in the presence of the greater luminary.  Such is the case in
the Gospels of Luke and John, wliilc Mattliew and Mark rest satis-
fied witli tlie less effective representation. Hence, as tlie least cal-
culated to magnify Jesus, tlie account of Matthew lias the advantage
in historical probability.

Thus at the time wlicn tlie two disciples must have been sent
to Jesus, tlie Baptist was already imprisoned, and we have remarked
above, tliat lie could hardly, so situated, transmit and receive mes-
sages. But popular legend might be prompted to fabricate sucli a
message tliat tlie Baptist might not depart without at least an incipi-
ent recognition of Jesus as the Messiali; so that neither the one nor
tlie oilier of the two incompatible statements is to be regarded as
historical.

§. 47. OPINION OF THE EVANGELISTS AND JESUS CONCERNING THE
BAPTIST, WITH HIS OWN JUDGMENT ON HIMSELF--RESULT OF
THE INQUIKY INTO THE EELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THESE TWO

INDIVIDUALS.

THE Evangelists apply to John, as tlic prcparer of the Messiah's
kingdom, several passages of the Old Testament.

Tlie abode of tlie preacher of repentance in the wilderness, his
activity in preparing tlie way for tlie Messiali, necessarily recalled
the passage of Isaiah (xl. 3 ff. LXX.): if>uvfj ftouv-cx; ev Ep^w £TO(-
juaoa-e -i}v b6bv Kvpfti), K. r. <l. Tills passage, wliicli in its original
connection related not to the Messiali and his forerunner, but, to
Jehovah, for whom a way was to be prepared through tlie wilder-
ness toward Judca, tliat lie might return witli his people from exile,
is quoted by tlie first three evangelists as a prophecy fulfilled by the
appearance of tlie Baptist (Matt. iii. 3 ; Mark i. 3 ; Luke iii. 4 ff.).
This might be thought a later and Christian application, but there
is nothing to controvert the statement of tlie fourth evangelist, tliat
the Baptist had himself characterized his destina-hon by those proph-
etic words.

As tlie synoptical gospels have unanimously borrowed tills pas-
sage from tlie Baptist himself, so Mark lias borrowed the application
of another prophetic passage to tlie Baptist from Jesus. Jesus liad
said (Matt. xi. 10. Luke vii. 27.): ovroc; yap 'UTI mpl ov 'yeypa'n-ac
ISov drroff-e/l/lu Tbv ay-ye/lfiv uov npb •npoauTTDV mv 0(: ita~aoits.va.oei rrjv
b66v aov ^-TpooOEv aov This is he of whom it is written, .Behold,
I send, my messenger before thy face, to prepare thy n'ay before
thee; and Mark, in tlie introduction to his Gospel, applies tlicse
words of Malaclii (iii. 1.), together witli tlie above passage from
Isaiali, witliout distinguishing their respective sources, to tlie fore-
runner, John. The text is a messianic one; Jehovah, however, does
not therein speak of sendine a messenger before the Messiali, but

THE LIFE OP JESUS.

236

these instances that the second person (aov) is substituted for the

first {^}.

Another notable passage of the same prophet (iii. 23. LXX. iv. 4.:

Kal ISoi) eyu d'noareXwv^uv 'HUav rov OEafS'iT-rjv, Trp'iv eX,9s1v rf]V T^pav
K.vpiov, a. T. ^ : Behold, I will send you I^jah the Tishbite be-
fore the coming of the day of the J^ord, <-6c.) suggested to the
evangelists the assimilation of John tlie Baptist to Ellas.  Tliat
John, labouring for the reformation of tlic people, in tlie spirit and
power of Elias, sliould prepare the way for tlie Divine visitation in
the times of the Messiah, was, according to Luke i. 17, predicted
before his birth. In John i. 21, when tlie emissaries of the San-
hedrim ask, "Art thou Elias?" the Baptist declines this dignity:

according to the usual explanation, he only extended his denial to
the rude popular notion, that he was the ancient Seer corporeally
resuscitated, whereas he would have admitted the view of tlie Sy-
noptical Gospels, that he liad tlie spirit of Elias. Nevertheless, it
appears improbable that if the fourth evangelist liad been familiar
with the idea of the Baptist as a second Elias, lie would have put

into Ins mouth so direct a negative.

This scene, peculiar to tlie fourth Gospel, in which John rejects
the title of Elias, with several others, demands a yet closer examina-
tion, and must be compared with a narrative in Luke (iii. 15.), to
which it has a striking similarity. In Luke, the crowd assembled
round the Baptist begin to think: Is not this the Christ ? ju^-n-oTe
avrbc; eii] 6 XpioToc; in John the deputies of tlie Sanhedrim* ask
him. Who art thou ? ov T('S- eZ; which we infer from the Baptist's
answer to mean: "Art thou, as is believed, the Messiah ?"f Ac-
cording to Luke, the Baptist answers, I indeed baptize you with
water; but one mig Jitter than I cometh, the latchet of 'whose shoes
I am not worthy to unloose. According to John he gives a similar
reply: I baptize with water; but there standeth one among you
whom ye know not; lie it is v:ho coming after me is preferred
before me, whose shoes^s latchet I am not worthy to unloose: the
latter evangelist adding his peculiar propositions concerning the pre-
existence of Jesus, and deferring to another occasion (v. 33.) tlie
mention of the Messiah's spiritual baptism, which Luke gives in
immediate connexion with the above passage. In Luke, and still
more decidedly in John, this whole scene is introduced with a de-
sign to establish the Messiahship of Jesus, by showing that tlie
Baptist had renounced that dignity, and attributed it to one who
should come after him. If at tlie foundation of two narratives so
similar, there can scarcely be more than one fact,:j: the question is,
which gives that fact tlie most faithfully? In Luke's account there
is no intrinsic improbability; on tlic contrary it is easy to imagine
that the people, congregated round the man wlio announced the Mes-
siah's kingdom, and baptized with a view to it, should, in momenta

ct- Ipnpnpd exesretists.

EELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.

237

of enthusiasm, believe him to be the Messiah. But that the San-
hedrim should send from Jerusalem to John on the banks of the
Jordan, for tlie sake of asking him whether he were the Messiah,
seems less natural. Their object could only be what, on a later oc-
casion, it was with respect to Jesus, (Matt. xxi. 23 ff.), namely, to
challenge the authority of John to baptize, as appears from v. 25.
Moreover, from the hostile position which John had taken towards
the sects of tlie Pharisees and Sadducees (Matt. iii. 7.), to whom
the members of the Sanhedrim belonged, they must have prejudged
that lie was not the Messiah, nor a prophet, and consequently, that
lie liad no right to undertake a ftd'nri.oy.a. Bat in that case, they
could not possibly have so put their questions as they are reported
to have done in the fourth Gospel. In the passage from Matthew
above cited, they ask Jesus, quite consistently with their impression
that lie had no prophetic authority: ev -roia e^ovala. rav-a TTOIS^ ; By
what authority doest thou these things? but in John, they question
the Baptist precisely as if they presupposed him to be the Messiah,
and wli^n he, apparently to their consternation, lias denied this,
they tender him successively the dignities of Elias, and of another
prophetic forerunner, as if they earnestly wished him to accept one
of these titles. Searching opponents will not thus thrust the high-
est honours on the man to whom they are inimical;-this is the
representation of a narrator wlio wislies to exhibit the modesty of
the man, and his subordination to Jesus, by his rejection of those
brilliant titles. To enable him to reject them, they must have been
offered; but this could in reality only be done by well-wishers, as
in Luke, where the conjecture that the Baptist was tlie Messiah is
attributed to tlie people.

Why then did not tlie fourth evangelist attribute those questions
likewise to the people, from whom, with a slight alteration, they
would have seemed quite natural ? Jesus, when addressing the un-
believing Jews in Jerusalem, John v. 33., appeals to their message
to the Baptist, and to the faithful testimony then given by tlie lat-
ter. Had Jolin given his declaration concerning his relation to
Jesus before tlie common people merely, such an appeal would have
been impossible; for if Jesus were to refer his enemies to the tes-
timony of John, that testimony must have been delivered before his
enemies; if tlie assertions of tlic Baptist were to have any diplo-
matic value, they must have resulted from the official inquiry of a
magisterial deputation. Such a remodelling of the facts appears to
have been aided, by the above-mentioned narrative from the synop-
tical traditions, wherein tlie high priests and scribes ask Jesus, by
wliat authority lie does such things (as tlie casting out of the buyers
and sellers). Here also Jesus refers to Jolin, asking for tlieir opinion
as to tlie authority of his baptism, only, it is true, with the nega-
tive view of repressing their farther inquiries (Matt. xxi. 23. ff.
parall.); but ho\v easily might tills reference be made to take an
affirmative sense, and instead of the argument, "If ye know not

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

238

what powers were entrusted to John, ye need not know whence
mine are given,"-tlie following be substituted: "Since ye know
what John has declared concerning me, ye must also know wliat
power and dignity belong to me;" whereupon what was originally
a question addressed to Jesus, transformed itself into a message to

the Baptist.*

Tlie judgment of Jesus on tlie character of Jolm is delivered on
two occasions in the Synoptical Gospels; first, after the departure
of John's messengers (Matt. xi. 7 ff.); secondly, after tlie appearance
of Elias at the transfiguration (Matt. xvii. 12 ff'.), in reply to the
question of a disciple. In the fourth Gospel, after an appeal to the
Baptist's testimony, Jesus pronounces an eulogium on him in the
presence of the Jews (v. 35.), after referring, as above remarked, to
their sending to Jolm. In this passage he calls tlie Baptist a burn-
ing and a shining light, in whose beams tlie fickle people were for
a season willing to rejoice.  In one synoptical passage, lie declares
John to be tlie promised Elias ; in tlie other, there are three points
to be distinguished. First, witli respect to tlie character and agency
of Jolm,-the severity and firmness of his mind, and tlie pre-emi-
nence which as the messianic forerunner, wlio witli forcible hand
had opened the kingdom of heaven, lie maintained even over tlie
prophets, are extolled (v. 7-14.); secondly, in relation to Jesus
and tlie citizens of the kingdom of heaven; tlie Baptist, though ex-
alted above all the members of tlie Old Testament economy, is de-
clared to be in tlie rear of every one on whom, through Jesus, the
new light liad arisen (v. 11.). We see how Jesus understood this
from what follows (v. 18.), when we compare it with Matt. ix. 16 f.
In tlie former passage Jesus describes Jolm as p?~e kaOiuv y,i\rs
•n'ww, neither eating nor drinking ; and in the latter it is tins very
asceticism which is said to liken him to the li.ia-ioK; and daitolc; TTO.-
/laio;c, tlie old garments and old bottles, witli wliicli tlie new, intro-
duced by, Jesus, will not agree. What else then could it be, in
which tlie Baptist was beneath the children of tlie kingdom of Je-
sus, but (in connexion with his non-recognition or only qualified
acknowledgment of Jesus as Messiah,) the spirit of external observ-
ance, which still clung to fasting and similar works, and his gloomy
asceticism ? And, in truth, freedom from these is tlie test. of tran-
sition from a religion of bondage, to one of liberty and spirituality.!
Thirdly, witli respect to the relation in which tlie agency of John
and Jesus stood to their cotemporarics, the same inaptitude to re-
ceive the ministrations of botii is complained of v. 16 ff., although in
v. 12 it is observed, tliat the violent zeal of some ftiwJ-al liad, under

* Whether the dialogue between John and his complaining disciples (John iii. 25
fK) be likewise a transmutation of the corresponding scene, Matt. ix. 11 f., as Brctschnei-

der seeks to show, must remain uncertain. Proliab. p. 6G ff.

f That, Jesus, as many suppose, assigns a low rank to the Baptist, because the latter
thought of introducing the new order of things by external violence, is not to be detected
in the Gospels,

RELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.

239

the guidance of John, wrested for them an entrance into the king-
dom of the Messiah.*

In conclusion, we must take a review of the steps by which tra-
dition has gradually annexed itself to the simple historical traits of
the relation between Jolm and Jesus. Thus much seems to be his-
torical : that Jesus, attracted by the fame of tlie Baptist, put him-
self under the tuition of that preacher, and that having remained
some time among his followers, and been initiated into his ideas of
the approaching messianic kingdom, he, after the imprisonment of
John, carried on, under certain modifications, tlie same work, never
ceasing, even when he liad far surpassed his predecessor, to render
him due homage.

Tlie first addition to tills in tlie Christian legend, was, that John
had taken approving notice of Jesus. During his public ministry,
it was known that lie had only indefinitely referred to one coming
after him; but it behoved him, at least in a conjectural way, to point
out Jesus personally, as that successor. To this it was thought he
might have been moved by the fame of the works of Jesus, which,
loud as it was, might even penetrate the walls of his prison. Then
was formed Mattliew's narrative of the message from prison; the
first modest attempt to make the Baptist a witness for Jesus, and
hence clotlied in an interrogation, because a categorical testimony
was too unprecedented.

But flits late and qualified testimony was not enough. It was
a late one, for prior to it there was tlie baptism which Jesus receiv-
ed from John, and by which he, in a certain degree, placed liimself
in subordination to the Baptist; hence those scenes in Luke, by
which tlie Baptist was placed even before his birth in a subservient
relation to Jesus.

Not oidy was it a late testimony, which that message contained;

it was but half a one: for the question implied uncertainty, and 6
Ep^ouevoi- conveyed indecision. Hence in the fourth Gospel there
is no longer a question about the Messiahship of Jesus, but the most
solemn asseverations on that head, and we have the most pointed
declarations of tlie eternal, divine nature of Jesus, and his character
as tlie sufi'ering Messiah.

In a narrative aiming at unity, as does the fourth Gospel, tlicse
very pointed declarations could not stand by the side of tlie dubi-
ous message, wliicli is therefore only found in this Gospel under a
totally reorganized form. Neither does tills message accord with
tliat wliicli in the synoptical gospels is made to occur at the baptism
ot Jesus, and even earlier in his intercourse witli John ; but tlie first
three evangelists, in their loose compositions, admitted, along with
tlie more recent form of tlie tradition, the less complete one, because
they attached less importance to the question of Jolin, than to the
consequent discourse of Jesus.

• For a different explanation see Schaeckenburger, Beitrage, S. 48 S

240                 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

§. 48. THE EXECUTION OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

WE here take under our examination, by way of appendix, all
that has been transmitted to us concerning the tragic end of the
Baptist. According to the unanimous testimony of the synoptical
evangelists and Josephus,* he was executed, after a protracted im-
prisonment, by order of Herod Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee ; and in
the New Testament accounts lie is said to have-been beheaded.
(Matt. xiv. 3 ff.; Mark vi. 17 ff. ; Luke ix. 9.)

But Josephus and tlie evangelists are at variance as to tlie cause
of his imprisonment and execution. According to the latter, tlie
censure which John liad pronounced on the marriage of Herod with
his (half) brother's f wife, was tlie cause of his imprisonment, and
tlie revengeful cunning of Herodias, at a court festival, of his death:

Josephus gives the fear of disturbances, which was awakened in
Herod by tlie formidable train of the Baptist's followers, as the cause
at once of tlie imprisonment and the execution.:): If tliese two ac-
counts be considered as distinct and irreconcileable, it may be doubt-
ed which of the two deserves tlie preference. It is not here as in
the case of Herod Agrippa's deatli. Acts xii. 23., viz., that tlie New
Testament narrative, by intermixing a supernatural cause where Jo-
sephus has only a natural one, enables us to prejudge it as unhis-
torical; on tlie contrary, we might here give tlie palm to tlie evan-
gelical narrative, for the particularity of its details. But on the other
liand, it must be considered tliat tliat very particularity, and espec-
ially the conversion of a political into a personal motive, corresponds
fully to tlie development of tlie legendary spirit among the people,
whose imagination is more at home in domestic than in political
circles.S Meanwhile it is quite possible to reconcile the two narra-
tives. This has been attempted by conjecturing, that tho fear of in-
surrection was tlie proper cabinet motive for tlie imprisonment of the
Baptist, wliile tlie irreverent censure passed on tlie ruler was thrust
forward as tlie ostensible motive. || But I greatly doubt whether
Herod would designedly expose tlie scandalous point touclicd on by
John; it is more likely, if a distinction is to be here made between
a private and ostensible cause, tliat the censure of tlie marriage was
the secret reason, and the fear of insurrection disseminated as an
excuse for extreme severity.^ Such a distinction, however, is not
needed; for Antipas might well fear, tliat Jolm, by his strong cen-
sure of the marriage and the wliole course of the tetrarch's life, might
stir up the people into rebellion against him.

But there is a diversity even between the evangelical narratives
themselves, not only in tills, tliat Mark gives the scene at the feast

* Antiq. xviii. v. 2. •I- This former husband of Herodias is named by the evangelist;.
Philip, by Josephus, Herod. He was the son of the high priest's dangliter, Mariamne, and
lived as a private person. V. Antiq.'xv. ix. 3: xviii. v. 1. 4. H. j. i. xxix. 2. xxx. 7.
t Antiq. xviii. v. 4.   g Hase, Leiien Jesu, S. 88.   || Fritzsche, Comin. in Matth. in loc.
Winer. bi'ul. Kealworterb. 1, S. 694..   ^ Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, a, S. 361 ; Schleier-

EELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.   241

with the most graphic details, while Luke is satisfied witli a concise
statement (iii. 18-20; ix. 9), and Matthew takes a middle course;

but Mark's representation of the relation between Herod and tlie
Baptist differs essentially from that of Matthew. Wliile according
to the latter, Herod wished to kill Jolin, but was withheld by his
dread of tlie people, wlio looked on the Baptist as a prophet (v. 5);

according to Mark, it was Herodias who conspired against his life,
but could not attain her object, because her husband was in awe of
John as a holy man, sometimes heard him gladly, and not seldom
followed his counsel (v. 19).* Here, again, tlie individualizing char-
acteristic of Mark's narrative lias induced commentators to prefer it
to tliat of Matthcw.t But in tlie finishing touclies and alterations
of Mark we may detect tlie hand of tradition; especially as Josephus
merely says of tlie people, tliat they gave ear to the sound of his
words, '/yQt\oa.v -y wpodaei rw ^oyw, wliile lie says of Herod, tliat
having conceived/ears of John, he judged it erpedient to put him
to death, SdacK; Kpe1~~ov fjyelrat (-bv 'ludvvTjv\ dvaipelv.  How near
lay the temptation to exalt the Baptist, by representing the prince
against whom lie liad spoken, and by whom lie was imprisoned, as
feeling bound to venerate him, and only, to his remorse, seduced
into giving his death-warrant, by his vindictive wife! It may be
added, tliat tlie account of Matthew is not inconsistent with the
character of Antipas, as gathered from other sources. ^

Tlie close of the evangelical narratives leaves the impression tliat
tlie dissevered head of Jolm was presented at table, and that the
prison was consequently close at hand. But we learn from the pas-
sage in Joscplius above cited, tliat the Baptist was confined in Ma-
cha'rus, a fortress on the southern border of Persia, whereas the
residence of Herod was in Tiberias,§ a day's journey distant from
Machairus. Hence tlie liead of Jolin the Baptist could only be pre-
sented to Herod after two day's journey, and not while lie yet sat
at table.  The contradiction here apparent is not to be removed by
tlie consideration, tliat it is not expressly said in the Gospels tliat
John's head was brought in during tlie meat, for this is necessarily
inferred from the entire narrative.  Not, only are tlie commission of
tlie executioner and his return with tlie liead, .detailed in immediate
connexion witli tlie incidents of tlie meal; but, only thus has tlie
wliole dramatic scene its appropriate conclusion;-only thus is the
contrast complete, wliicli is formed by tlie death-warrant and the
feast: in fine, tlie Triraf, on which tlie dissevered head is presented,
marks it as the costliest viand wliicli tlie unnatural revenge of a
woman could desire at table. But we have, as a probable solution,
the information of Josephus, || tliat Herod Antipas was tlien at war
witli tlie Arabian king, Aretas, between whose kingdom and his own

* Vergl. Fritzsche, Comm. in Marc. p. 223. •{• E. g. Schneckenbnrger, iiber den TJr-
Epning dus ersh.n kanonischen Evangeliums, S. 86 f. That the sivirffSil of Matthew, v.
.1, 13 not contradictory to his own narrative, see Fritzsche, in loc.   t Winer, bibl. Eeal-

242

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

lay tlie fortress of Machscrus ; and there Herod might possibly have
resided with his court at tliat period.

Thus we see that the life of John in the evangelical narratives
is, from easily conceived reasons, overspread with mythical lustre
on the side which is turned toward Jesus, while on the other its his-
torical lineaments, are more visible.
