

EVENTS

CHAPTER VIII.

IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OP JESUS, EXCLUDING THE
MIRACLES.

§ 84. GENERAL COMPARISON OF THE MANNER OF NARRATION THAT
DISTINGUISHES THE SEVERAL EVANGELISTS.

IF, before proceeding to the consideration of details, we compare
the general character and tone of the historical narration in the
various gospels, we find differences, first, between Matthew and the
two other synoptists; secondly, between the three first evangelists

collectively and the fourth.

Among the reproaches which modem criticism has heaped on

the gospel of Matthew, a prominent place has been given to its
want of individualized and dramatic life; a want which is thought
to prove that the author was not an eye-witness, since an eye-wit-
ness is ordinarily distinguished by the precision and minuteness of
his narration.* Certainly, when we read the indefinite designation

rnliocrentibv-s conte.ceras, nmmunquam ex contranis, nonnunquam ex sim'ilibus, nonnunquam ex
'''*"   -^'l nratwnis quodque mewhrum semper excipiat prius, szc ut

---*n«*

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LITE OF JESUS,         421

of times, places and persons, the perpetually recurring rvre, then,
wapdyuv eneWev, departing from thence, avSpuircx;, a man, which
characterize tills gospel; wlien we recollect its wholesale statements,
such as that Jesus went through all the cities and villages (ix. 35;

xi. 1; comp. iv. 23); tliat they brought to him all sick people, and
that lie liealed them all (iv. 24 f.; xiv. 35 f.; comp. xv. 29 ff.);

and finally, the bareness and brevity of many isolated narratives:

we cannot disapprove tlie decision of this criticism, that Matthew's
whole narrative resembles a record of events which, before they
were committed to writing, liad been long current in oral tradition,
and had tlius lost tlie impress of particularity and. minuteness. But
it must be admitted, that this proof, taken alone, is not absolutely
convincing; for in most cases we may verify the remark, that
even an eye-witness may be unable graphically to narrate what
lie has seen.*

But our modern critics liave not only measured Matthew by the
standard of wliat is to be expected from an eye-witness, in the
abstract; they have also compared him witli Ins fellow-evangelists.
They are of opinion, not only tliat Jolin decidedly surpasses Mat-
thew in tlie power of delineation, both in their few parallel passages
and in his entire narrative, but also tliat the two other synoptists,
especially Mark, are generally far clearer and fuller in their style of
narration, f This is tlie actual fact, and it ought not to be any
longer evaded. With respect to tlie fourth evangelist, it is true
that, as one would have anticipated, he is net devoid of general,
wliolesale statements, such as, that Jesus during the feast did many
miracles, tliat hence many believed on him (ii. 23), with others of
a similar kind (iii. 22; vii. 1): and he not seldom designates
persons indecisively.  Sometimes, however, lie gives the names of
individuals whom Mattlicw does not specify (xii. 3, 4; comp. with
Matt. xxvi. 7, 8 ; and xviii. 10. with Matt. xxvi. 51; also vi. 5 ff.
with Matt. xiv. 16 f.); and lie generally lets us know the district
or country in whicli an event happened. His careful chronology
we have already noticed; but the point of chief importance is that
his narratives, (e, g. that of the man born blind, and. that of tlie
resurrection of Lazarus,) liave a dramatic and life-like character,
whicli we seek in vain in the first gospel. The two intermediate
evangelists are not free from indecisive designations of time (e. g.
Mark viii. 1; Luke v. 17 ; viii. 22); of place (Mark iii. 13 ; Luke
vi. 12); and of persons (Mark x. 17; Luke xiii. 23); nor from
statements tliat Jesus went through all cities, and liealed all the
sick (Mark i. 32 ff.; 38 f.; Luke iv. 40 f.); but they often give ua
the details of what Matthew has only stated generally. Not only
does Luke associate many discourses of Jesus witli special occasions
concerning which Matthew is silent, but botli he and Mark notice
the office or names of persons, to whom Mattliew gives no precise

* Olshauaen, b. Comm. 1, S. 15. + See the above named critics, passim ; and Hug.

422 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

designation (Matt. ix. 18; Mark v. 22; Luke viii. 41; Mattli. xix.
16; Luke xviii. 18; Matt. xx. 30; Mark x. 46). But it is chiefly
in tlie lively description of particular incidents, that we perceive
the decided superiority of Luke, and still more of Mark, over
Matthew. Let tlie reader only compare tlie narrative of tlie execu-
tion of John tlie Baptist in Mattlicw and Mark (Mattli. xiv. 3:

Mark vi. 17), and tliat of tlie demoniac or dcmoniacs of Gadara
(Matt. viii. 28 ff. parall.).

These facts are, in tlie opinion of our latest critics, a confirmation
of tlie fourth evangelist's claim to tlie character of an eye-witness,
and of tlie greater proximity of tlie second and third evangelists to
tlie scenes they describe, than can Le attributed to tlie first. But,
even allowing tliat one wlio does not narrate graphically cannot he
an eye-witness, tin's docs not involve tlie proposition tliat whoever
docs narrate graphically must be an eye-witness. In all cases in
wliicli there are extant two accounts of a single fact, tlie one full, tlie
other concise, opinions may be divided as to wliicli of them is the
original.* When tliese accounts liave been liable to the modifica-
tions of tradition, it is important to bear in mind that tradition has
two tendencies: the one, to sublimate the concrete into tlie abstract,
tlie individual into tlie general; the other, not less essential, to sub-
stitute arbitrary fictions for tlie historical reality wliicli is lost.f If
then we put tlie want of precision in the narrative of tlie first evange-
list to tlie account of tlie former function of the legend, ouo-ht we at

o        7       0

once to regard tlie precision and dramatic effect of tlie other gospels,
as a proof tliat their authors were eye-witnesses? Must we not rather
cxamino whether tlicsc qualities bo not derived from tlie second
function of tlie legend?.): Tlie decision with which tlie other infer-
ence is drawn, is in fact merely an after-taste of the old orthodox
opinion, tliat all our gospels proceed immediately from eye-witnesses,
or at least through a medium incapable of error. Modern criticism
has limited tills supposition, and admitted the possibility that one or
the other of our gospels may liave been affected by oral tradition.
Accordingly it maintains, not without probability, tliat a gospel in
which the descriptions are throughout destitute of colouring and life,
cannot be tlie production of an eye-witness, and must liave suffered
from tlie effacing fingers of tradition. But tlie counter proposition,
tliat tlie other gospels, in which tlie style of narration is more de-
tailed and dramatic, rest on tlie testimony of eye-witnesses, would
only follow from tlie supposed necessity that this must. be the case
witli some of our gospels.  For if such a supposition be made witli
respect to several narratives of both the above kinds, there is no
question that the more graphic and vivid ones are with preponderant
probability to be referred to eye-witnesses. But this supposition lias

* Conip. Sunnier, ttbcr die Qucllen des Markus, S. 42 ff.  •)- Kern, uber den Trs.pr,
ties Ev"i -MiUthi lit sup, St TO fi   ^ 1 sav, examim'. u'hvtker-not, consider it dvcidfd fhrii
^^ *!,„» +i./, „,.,...„„+:,.„ ^ ^, ,„»„„„»-. tiiot T i,c.' 1 ntli thp n;irtu-ii1antv and tlie brevitv ul

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

42S

merely a subjective foundation. It was an easier transition for com-
mentators to make from tlie old notion that all the gospels were im-
mediately or mediately autoptical narratives, to tlie limited admission
that perhaps one may fall short of this character, than to the eeneral
admission tliat it mav be equally wanting to all.  But, accordino- to
the rigid rules of consequence, with the orthodox view of tlie scriptu-
ral canon, falls the assumption of pure ocular testimony, not only for
one or oilier of tlie gospels, but for all: tlie, possibility of the con-
trary must be presupposed in relation to them all, and tlicir preten-
sions must be estimated according to their internal character, com-
pared with the external testimonies. From this point of view-tlie
only one that criticism can consistently adopt-it is as probable, con-
sidering tlie nature of tlie external testimonies examined in our In-
troduction, that the three last evangelists owe the dramatic effect in
which they surpass Matthew, to tlie embellishments of a more mature
tradition, as tliat tins quality is tlie result of a closer communication
with eye-witnesses.

Tliat we may not anticipate, let us, in relation to this question,
refer to the results we have already obtained. The greater particu-
larity by which Luke is distinguished from Mattliew in his account
of tlie occasions that suggested many discourses of Jesus, has ap-
peared to us often to be tlie result of subsequent additions; and the
names of persons in Mark (xiii. 3. comp. v. 37; Luke viii. 51.) have
seemed to rest on a mere inference of tlie narrator. Now, however,
tliat we arc about to er.ter on an examination of particular narratives,
w; will consider, from tlie point of view above indicated, the constant
forms of introduction, conclusion, and transition, already noticed, in
tlie several gospels. Here we rind the difference between Matthew
and the other synoptists, as to tlicir more or less dramatic style, im-
printed in a manner tliat can best teacli us how much tills style is
worth.

Mattliew (viii. 16 f.) states in general terms, tliat on tlie evening-
after tlie cure of Peter's mother-in-law, many dcmoniacs were brought
to Jesus, all of whom, together witli others that were sick, lie healed.
Mark (i. 32.) in a highly dramatic manner, as if lie himself had wit-
nessed the scene, tells, tliat on the same occasion, the wliole city was
gathered together at tlie door of tlie liouse in wliicli Jesus w^as ; at
another time, he makes tlie crowd block up the entrance (ii. 2.); in
two other instances, lie describes tlie concourse as so great, tliat Je-
.sus and his disciples could not take their food (iii. 20; vi. 31.); and
Luke on one occasion states, tliat tlie people even gathered togetlier
in innumerable multitudes so tliat they trode one upon another.
(xii. 1.). All highly vivid touches, certainly: but tlie want of them
can hardly be prejudicial to Matthew, for they look thoroughly like
strokes of imagination, such as abound in Mark's narrative, and often,
as Schlcicrmachcr observes,* give it almost an apocryphal appear-
ance. In detailed narratives, of which we shall presently notice

424

THE LIFE OF JE8US.

many examples, while Matthew simply tells what Jesus said on a
certain occasion, the two other evangelists are able to describe tlie
glance with which his words were accompanied (Mark iii. 5; x. 21;

Luke vi. 10). On tlie mention of a blind beggar of Jericho, Mark
is careful to give us his name, and the name of his father (x. 46).
From these particulars we might already augur, wliat tlie examina-
tion of single narratives will prove: namely, that tlie copiousness of
Mark and Luke is the product of tlie second function of tlie legend,
which we may call the function of embellishment. Was tills em-
bellishment gradually wrought out by oral tradition, or was it the
arbitrary addition of our evangelists ? Concerning tills, there may
be a difference of opinion, and a degree of probability in relation to
particular passages is tlie nearest, approach that can be made to a de-
cision. In any case, not only must it be granted, that a narrative
adorned by tlie writer's own additions is more remote from primitive
truth tlian one free from sucli additions; but we may venture to
pronounce that the earlier efforts of tlie legend are rapid sketches,
tending to set off' only the leading points whether of speech or action,
and that at a later period it aims rather to give a symmetrical effect
to tlie whole, including collateral incidents; so that, in either view,
the closest approximation to truth remains on tlie side of the first
gospel.

While the difference as to tlie more or less dramatic style of
concluding and connecting forms, lies chiefly between Mattliew and
the other synoptists ; another difference with respect to these forms
exists between all tlie synoptists and John. While most of the
synoptical anecdotes from the public life of Jesus are wound up by
a panegyric, those of John generally terminate, so to speak, polemi-
cally. It is true that tlie three first evangelists sometimes mention,
by way of conclusion, tlie offence tliat J esus gave to the narrow-
hearted, and tlie machinations of Ills enemies against liiin (Matt. viii.
34; xii. 14; xxi. 46 ; xxvi. 3 f.; Luke iv. 28 f.; xi. 35 f.); and, on
the other liand, tlie fourth evangelist closes some discourses and
miracles by tlie remark, that in consequence of them, many believed
on Jesus (ii. 23; iv. 39. 53; vii. 31. 40 f.; viii 30; x. 42 ; xi. 45).
But in the synoptical gospels, throughout the period previous to the
residence of Jesus in Jerusalem, we find forms implying that tlie
fame of Jesus had extended far and wide (Matt. iv. 24; ix. 26. 31;

Mark i. 28. 45 ; v. 20; vii. 36; Luke iv. 37 ; v. 15; vii. 17 ; viii.
39); that tlie people were astonished at his doctrine (Matt. vii. 28;

Mark i. 22; xi. 18; Luke xix. 48), and miracles (Matt. viii. 27;

ix. 8; xiv. 33; xv. 31), and hence followed him from all parts
(Matt. iv. 25; viii. 1; ix, 36; xii. 15; xiii. 2; xiv. 13).   In the
fourth gospel, on tlie contrary, we are continually told that the Jews
sought to kill Jesus (v. 18 ; vii. 1); tlie Pharisees wish to take him,
or send out officers to seize him (vii. 30. 32. 54; comp. viii. 20;

x. 39); stones are taken up to cast at him (viii. 59 ; x. 31); and
cvp.n in tlinsp. iiaaaivo-p.c; whpro there is mention of a favourable dis-

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

425

position on the part of the people, tlie evangelist limits it to one
portion of them, and represents the other as inimical to Jesus (vii.
11-13).   He is especially fond of drawing attention to such cir-
cumstances, as tliat before tlie final catastrophe all the guile and
power of tlie enemies of Jesus were exerted in vain, because his
liour was not yet come (vii. 30; viii. 20); tliat the emissaries sent
out against him, overcome by tlie force of his words, and the dignity
of his person, retired without fulfilling their errand (vii. 32. 44 ff.);

and tliat Jesus passed unharmed through the midst of an exasper-
ated crowd (viii. 59; x. 39: comp. Luke iv. 30).  The writer, as
we liave above remarked, certainly does not intend us in tliese in-
stances to think of a natural escape, but of one in which tlie higher
nature of Jesus, his invulnerability so long as lie did not clioose to
lay down his life, was his protection. And tins throws some liglit
on tlie object which the fourth evangelist had in view, in giving
prominence to sucli traits as those just enumerated : they helped him
to add to the number of tlie contrasts, by wliicli, throughout his
works, lie aims to exalt the person of Jesus. Tlie profound-wisdom
of Jesus, as tlie divine Logos, appeared the more resplendent, from
its opposition to the rude unapprehensiveness of the Jews ; his good-
ness wore a more touching aspect, confronted with tlie inveterate
malice of his enemies; his appearance gained in impressiveness, by
the strife lie excited among the people; and his power, as that of
one who liad life in himself, commanded tlie more reverence, tlie
oftcncr his enemies and their instruments tried to seize him, and, as
if restrained by a higher power, w-ere not able to lay hands on him,-
tlie more marvellously lie passed through the ranks of adversaries
prepared to take away his,l'ife. It lias been made matter of praise
to the fourth evangelis,t,-'tliat lie alone presents the opposition of tlie
pharisaic party to Jesus, in its rise and gradual progress: but there
are reasons for,questioning whether tlie course of events described
by him, be^n'ot rather fictitious than real. Partially fictitious, it
evideiitlyTs; for lie appeals to tlie supernatural for a reason why the
Pharisees so long effected nothing against Jesus: "whereas the sy-
noptists preserve tlie natural sequence of tlie facts by stating as a
'cause, tliat tlie Jewish hierarchy feared tlie people, wlio where at-
tached to Jesus as a prophet (Matt. xxi. 46; Mark xii. 12; Luke
xx. 19). If then tlie fourth evangelist was so far guided by his
dogmatical interest, tliat for tlie escape of Jesus from the more early
snares and assaults of his enemies, lie invented such a reason as best
suited his purpose; wliat shall assure us that lie has not also, in
consistency witli tlie characteristics which we have already discerned
in him, fabricated, for tlie sake of tliat interest, entire scenes of the
kind above noticed ?   Not tliat we liold it improbable, tliat many
futile plots and attacks of the enemies of Jesus preceded the final
catastrophe of his fate:-we are only dubious whether these attempts
were precisely such as the gospel of John describes.

426                 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

§ 85. ISOLATED GROUPS OF ANECDOTES-IMPUTATION OF A LEAGUE
WITH BEELZEBUB, AND DEMAND OP A SIGN.

IN conformity with the aim of our criticism, we shall here confine
our attention to those narratives, in which the influence of the legend
may be demonstrated. The strongest evidence of this influence is
found where one narrative is blended with another, or where tlie one
is a mere variation of the other: hence, chronology liaving refused
us its aid, we shall arrange the anecdotes about to be considered

according to their mutual affinity.

To begin with the more simple form of legendary influence:

Schuiz has already complained, tliat Matthew mentions two in-
stances, in which a league with Beelzebub was imputed to Jesus,
and a sign demanded from Ilim; circumstances which in Mark and
Luke liappcn only once.*  The first time tlie imputation occurs
(Matt. ix. 32 ft'.), Jesus has cured a dumb dcinonianic; at tills the
people marvel, but tlie Pharisees observe, JIe casts out demons
through tha prince, (ap^uv) of tlw demons. Matthew does not here
say that Jesus returned any answer to this accusation. On tlie sec-
ond occasion (xii. 22. ff), it is a blind and dumb demonianic whom
Jesus cures; again tlie people are amazed, and again tlie Pharisees
declare tliat the cure is effected by tlie help of Beelzebub, tlie ap,V"r of
tlie demons, whereupon Jesus immediately exposes tlie absurdity of
the accusation. Tliat it should have been alleged against Jesus
more than once when he cast out demons, is in itself probable. It
is however suspicious that tlie demoniac who gives occasion to the
assertion of the Pharisees, is in both instances dumb (in tlie second
only, blindness is added). Dcmoniacs were of many kinds, every
variety of malady being ascribed to the influence of evil spirits ; why,
then, sliould tlie above imputation be not once attaclied to the cure
of another kind of demoniac, but twice to that of a dumb one'? The
difficulty is heightened, if we compare tlie narrative of Luke (xi.
14 f), which, in its introductory description of tlie circumstances,
corresponds not to tlie second narrative in Matthew, but to tlie first;

for as there, so in Luke, tlie demoniac is only dumb, and his cure
and the astonishment of the people are told witli precisely the same
form of expression:-in all which points, tlie second narrative of
Mattliew is more remote from tliat of Luke. But with tills cure of
tlie dumb demoniac, wliicli Mattliew represents as passing off in
silence on tlie part of Jesus, Luke connects tlie very discourse which
Mattliew appends to tlie cure of tlie one both blind and dumb; so
tliat Jesus must on botli these successive occasions, have said the
same thing. This is a very unlikely repetition, and united with tlie
improbability, that tlie same accusation sliould be twice made in
connexion with a dumb demoniac, it suggests tlie question, whether
legend may not here have doubled one, and the same incident? How
this can liave taken place, Mattliew himself shows us, by represent-

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.         427

ing tlie demoniac as, in tlie one case, simply dumb, in tlie other,
blind also. Must it not liave been a striking cure wliicli excited,
on tlie one hand, the astonishment of tlie people, on the other, this
desperate attack of tlie enemies of Jesus ? Dumbness alone might
soon appear an insufficient malady for tlie subject of tlie cure, and
the legend, ever, prone to enhance, might deprive him of siglit also.
If then, together witli this new form of the legend, the old one too
was handed down, what wonder tliat a compiler, more conscientious
than critical, such as tlie author of tlie first gospel, adopted both as
distinct histories, merely omitting on one occasion the discourse of
Jesus, for the sake of avoiding repetition.*

Mattliew, having omitted (ix. 34) the discourse of Jesus, was
obliged also to defer tlie demand of a sign, which required a previ-
ous rejoinder on tlie part of Jesus, until his second narration of the
charge concerning Bclzebub; and in tills point again tlie narrative
of Luke, who also attaclics tlie demand of a sign to tlie accusation,
is parallel witli tlie latter passage of Matthew, f But Matthew not
only has, with Luke, a demand of a sign in connexion witli the

* Schleiermacher (S, 175), does not perceive the connexion of the discourse on the
blasphemy against tlie Holy Gliost, in Matthew (xii, 31 f.) though it links on excellently
to the foregoing expression, eyu iv •srvei'fia.Ti Scov enfSuW.u -u Saifiovia (v. 38), It is more
easy, however, to understand this difficulty, than that he sliould think (S. 183 f,) that
discourse better introduced in Luke (xii* 10)i For here, between the preceding proposi-
tion, tliat. whosoever denies the Son of man before men, shall be denied before tlie angels
of God, and tlie one in question, the only connexion is that the expression upvuff'Qa.i. T&V
vlov TOV uv^pc-iTTOV brought to the writer's recollection the words Enrsiv Etc Uyov rbv vlov TOV
dvi?p(J7roy.   One proof of this is tliat between the latter passage and the succeeding dec-
laration, that tlie necessary words would be given to the disciples, when before tlie tribu-
nal, by the irvevp.a uf'iov, the connexion consists just as siipcrlicially in the expression
irvEv^a flyiov. Wliat follows in Matthew (v, 33-37), had been partly given already in
the sermon on the mount, but stands licre in a better connexion than Schleiermacher is
willing to admit.

^ Luke makes tlie demand of a sign follow immediately on the accusation, and then
gives in succession the answers of Jesus to both. This representation modern criticism
holds to be far more probable than that of Matthew, wlio gives first the accusation and its
answer, tlien tlie demand of a sign and its refusal; and tills judgment is grounded
on the difficulty of supposing, that after Jesus had given a sufficiently long answer
to tlie accusation, the very same people who liad urged it would still demand a sign
(Schleiermacher, S. 175 ; Schneckenburger, fiber den L'rsprung, S. 52 f.) But on the
other liand, it is equally improbable tliat Jc.sns, after having some time ago delivered a
forcible discourse on tlie more important point, the accusation concerning Beelzebub, and
even after an interruption which had led him to a totally irrelevant declaration (Luke xi.
27 ft), should revert to tlie less important point, namely, the demand of a sign, The dis-
course OH tlie departure and return of the unclean spirit, is in Matthew (v. 4:3-4-5) an-
nexed to tlie reply of Jesus to this demand ; but in Luke (xi. 24; ff.) it follows the answer
to the imputation of a league with Beelzebub, and this may at first seem to be a more
suitable arrangcmcnti But on a closer examination, it will appear very improbable that
Jesus should conclude a defence, exacted from him by his enemies, with so calm and purely
theoretical a discourse, which supposes an audience, if not favourably prepossessed, at
least open to instruction ; and it will be found tliat here again there is no further con-
nexion than that both discourses treat of tlie expulsion of demons. By this single feature
of resemblance, tlie writer of the third gospel was led to sover the connexion between the
answer to (lie oft-named accusation, and that to the demand of a sign, wliich accusation
and demand, as the s;rongest proofs of the malevolent unbelief of the enemies of Jesus,
seem to have been associated by tradition. The first evangelist refrained from this vio-
lence, and reserved tlie discourse on the return of the unclean spirit, which was suggested
by the suspicion cast on tlie expulsion of demons by Jesus, until he had communicated thff

428

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

above charge; he lias also another, after tlie second feeding of the
multitude (xvi. 1 ff.), and this second demand Mark also lias (viii.
11 f.), while he omits the first. Here the Pharisees come to Jesus
(according to Matthew, in the unlikely companionship of Sadducees),
and tempt him by asking for a. sign, from. heaven, ai]ueiov en TW
ovpavov. To this Jesus gives an answer, of wliicli the concluding pro-
position, a zoicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign;

and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet
Jonas, ysvea r:ovi]pa aal jUOi^a/lZc (3i]i.isiov eTt^reZ, KCU or)iie~iov ov 60-
0fiaerai avry, d yiff -o a'q^elov 'luva -ov -rpo^^-ov, in Matthew, agrees
word for word witli the opening of the earlier refusal. It is already
improbable enough, tliat Jesus sliould have twice responded to the
above requisition with tlie same cnismatical reference to Jonah ; but
the words (v. 2, 3) wdilch, in the second passage of Matthew, precede
the sentence last quoted, are totally unintelligible. Por wliy Jesus,
in reply to tlie demand of his enemies that lie would show them a
sign from heaven, should tell them tliat they were indeed well versed
in the natural signs of the heavens, but were so much tlie more glar-
ingly ignorant of the spiritual signs of the messianic times, is so far
from evident, tliat the otherwise unfounded omission of v. 2 and 3,
seems to have arisen from despair of rinding any connexion for
them.* Luke, who also lias, (xii. 44 f.), in words only partly varied,
tills reproach of Jesus that his cotemporaries understood better tlie
signs of tlie weather than of the times, gives it another position,
wliich might be regarded as the preferable one ; since after speaking
of tlie fire which he was to kindle, and the divisions which lie was
to cause, Jesus might very aptly say to the people: You take no
notice of the. unmistakeable prognostics of this great revolution
which is being prepared by my means, so ill do you understand the
signs of the times.t But on a closer examination, Luke's arrange-
ment appears just as abrupt here, as in tlie case of the two parables
(xiii. 18)4 If from hence we turn again to Matthew, we easily see
liow he was led to his mode of representation,  He may have been
induced to double tlie demand of a sign, by the verbal variation
which he met witli, the required sign being at one time called simply
a ari[is~iov, at another a O-^MOV en TOV ovpavov. And if lie knew that
Jesus had exhorted tlie Jews to study the signs of the times, as
they liad hitherto studied tlie appearance of tlie heavens, the con-
jecture was not very remote, tliat the Jews liad given occasion for
this admonition by demanding a sign from. heaven, cny.ewv KK TOV
ovpavov. Thus Mattliew here presents us, as Luke often does else-
where, with a fictitious introduction to a discourse of Jesus ; a proof
of the proposition, advaaiced indeed, but too little regarded by Sicf-
fert :§ that it is in tlie nature of traditional records, such as the three
first gospels, tliat one particular should be best preserved in this

* Vid. Griesbach, Coniin. crit. in loc.
f Comp. Schkiiirmacher, S. 190 f.
+ Wptte pv,-p- Hanrlllucli. i. S. 139.

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.         429

narrative, another in that; so that first one, and then the other, ia
at a disadvantage, in comparison with the rest.

§ 86. VISIT OF THE' MOTHEE AND BEETHEEN OF JESUS--THE WOMAN
WHO PEONOUNCES THE MOTIIEE OF JESUS BLESSED.

ALL the synoptists mention a visit of the mother and brethren

of Jesus, on being apprised of wliich Jesus points to his disciples,
and declares tliat they who do tlie wdll of God arc his mother and
liig brethren (Matt. xii. 46 ff.; Mark iii. 31 ff.; Luke viii. 19 ff.).
Matthew and Luke do not tell us tlie object of this visit, nor, con-
sequently, whether tills declaration of Jesus, wliicli appears to imply
a disowning of his relatives, was occasioned by any special circum-
stance. On tills subject Mark gives us unexpected information : he
tells us (v. 21) that wliile Jesus was teaching among a concourse of
people, who even prevented him from taking food, his relatives,
under the idea that he was beside himself, went out to seize him,
and take him into the keeping of his family.* In describing this in-
cident, the evangelist makes use of tlie expression, S^-syov on. K^EO-I],
{they said, he is beside himself), and it was merely tills expression,
apparently, tliat suggested to him wliat lie next proceeds to narrate:

ol ypajJ.i.i.a.TEic e^eyov, o-t Bee^efJovX S^ei K. -. \. (the scribes said, he
hath Beelzebub, &c., comp. John x. 20). With this reproach, which
however, lie does not attacli to an expulsion of demons, he connects
the answer of Jesus; he then recurs to the relatives, whom he now
particularizes as tlie mother and brethren of Jesus, supposing them
to have arrived in tlie meantime; and he makes their announcement
call forth from Jesus the answer of wliich we have above spoken.

Tliese particulars imparted by Mark are very welcome to com-
mentators, as a means of explaining and justifying tlie apparent
harshness of tlie answer wliicli Jesus returns to the announcement
of his nearest relatives, on tlie ground of the perverted object of
their visit. But, apart from the difficulty that, on the usual inter-
pretation of tlie accounts of the childhood of Jesus, it is not to be
explained liow his mother could, after the events therein described,
be thus mistaken in her son, it is very questionable whether we ouglit
to accept this information of Mark's. In tlie first place, it is asso-
ciated witli tl'.e obvious exaggeration, that Jesus and Ills disciples
were prevented even from taking food by tlie throng of people ; and
in tlie second place, it has in itself a strange appearance, from its
want of relation to tlie context.  If these points are considered,
it will scarcely be possible to avoid agreeing witli the opinion of
Sclileiermacher, tliat no explanation of the tlicn existing relations
of Jesus with his family is to be sought in this addition; that it
rather belongs to tliose exaggerations to wliicli Mark is so prone, as
well in his introductions to isolated incidents, as in his general state-

430

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

mcnts.* lie wished to make it understood why Jesus returned an
ungracious answer to the announcement of Ills relatives; tor this
purpose lie thought it necessary to give their visit an object of
which Jesus did not approve, and as he knew tliat tlie Pharisees
had pronounced him to be under tlie influence of Beelzebub, lie at-
tributed a similar opinion to his relatives.

If we lay aside this addition of Mark's, the comparison of tlie
three very similar narratives presents no result as it regards their
matter;+ but there is a striking difference between tlie connexions
in wliicli tlie evangelists place tlie event. Matthew and Mark
insert it after tlie defence against tlie suspicion of diabolical aid, and.
before tlie parable of tlie sower, whereas Luke makes the visit
considerably prior to that imputation, and places the parable even
before tlie visit.  It is worthy of notice, however, tliat Luke has,
after the defence against tlie accusation of a league with Beelzebub,
in tlie position wliicli tlie two other evangelists give to tlie visit of
the relatives of Jesus, an incident which issues in a declaration,
precisely similar to tliat wliicli tlie announcement calls forth. After
the refutation of the Pharisaic reproach, and the discourse on the,
return of the unclean spirit, a woman in tlie crowd is rilled with
admiration, and pronounces tlie mother of Jesus blessed, on which
Jesus, as before on tlie announcement of Ills mother, replies; Yea,
rather blessed are they v:ho hear the word of God and keep it /f
Schleiermacher here again prefers the account of Luke: lie thinks
tills little digression on the exclamation of the woman, especially
evinces a fresh and lively recollection, wliicli has inserted it in its
real place and circumstances; whereas Mattlicw, confounding tlie
answer of Jesus to the ejaculation of tlie woman, witli tlie very
similar one to the announcement of his relatives, gives to the latter
tlie place of the former, and tliua passes over the scene with the
wonian.§ But how tlie woman could feel herself hurried away into
so enthusiastic an exclamation, precisely on hearing the abstruse
discourse on tlie return of tlie expelled demons, or even the. foregoing
rcprchcnsive reply to the Pharisees, it is difficult to understand, and
tlie contrary conjecture to tliat, of Schleiermacher might rather be
established; namely, tliat in tlie place of tlie announcement of tlie
relatives, tlie writer of tlie third gospel inserted tlie scene with tlie

• Ueber den Lukas, S. 121.  •[• Schncckcnbiirger, (illier den Urspr. S. .'">t), finds an
attempt at dramatic enect in the tint. "w, and tile t'/crnvac n/v ^npa, of Matthew, as coin-
pared with the eiTT'.iv aiid TT^pi^/^'afzKvoc />{'/>:?,<.) of Mark.   This is a remarkable proof of
the partial acumen which plays so distinguished a part to th1 disadvantage of Matthew in
modern criticism. Fur who does not see that if Matthew had SLTTOV, it would lie numbered
among tlie proofs tliat his narrative is wanting in dramatic life? As for tlie vords fhTelvar
TI'IV yipii, there is nothing to be discovered in thnn wliicli could give to them more than
to tlie KE'}if3^,eipu^£VO(; of murk llie stamp of artiiiciality : we might as well attribute (lie
latter expression to Mark^s al eadv discovered fondness for describing tlie action of tlie
eyes, and consequently regard t as an addition of Ilia own.

^ Answer to the aimoucen .•nt, viii. 21 ;     Answer t.» ti*,.' woman, xi. 28 : fiKvovv'^E
^r?/p JMOV Kai uoiA^oi fiov OL'TO ELOLV ol TOV ^i/capifit (sc. oi'^ ?/ itij~-i]i) uor, u/.Z') Oi ukovov-
'A(i\'nt' -run ^f'nn n^n/'vnr ^al ^Oiof'rr^c Cli'TOV. TCC TOV Aoyur Toil -^sov Kai (!>u/i^(7CorTFf, ^I'TOV.

EVENTS IS THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

431

woman, from its having a like termination.  The evano-elical tra-
dition, as we see from Mattliew and Mark, whether from historical
or merely accidental motives, had associated tlie above visit and the
saying about tlie spiritual relatives, with the discourse of Jesus on
tlie accusation of a league witli Beelzebub, and on the return of the
unclean spirit; and Luke also, when lie came to tlie conclusion of
tliat discourse, was reminded of the anecdote of the visit and its
point-tlie extolling of a spiritual relationship to Jesus. But he
liad already mentioned tlie visit ;* he therefore seized on tlie scene
witli tlie woman, wdiich presented a similar termination. From the
strong resemblance between tlie two anecdotes, I can scarcely believe
that they are founded on two really distinct incidents; rather, it is
more likely that tlie memorable declaration of Jesus, tliat lie pre-
ferred his spiritual before his bodily relatives, liad in the legend
received two different settings or frames. According to one, it
seemed the most natural that such a depreciation of his kindred
should be united witli an actual rejection of them ; to another, that
the exaltation of those wlio were spiritually near to him, should be
called forth bv a blessing pronounced on those who were nearest to
him in the flesh.  Of tliese two forms of tlie legend, Mattliew and
Mark give only the first: Luke, however, liad already disposed of
this on an earlier occasion; when, therefore, lie came to the passage
where, in tlio common evangelical tradition, tliat anecdote occurred,
he was induced to supply its place by the second form.

§ 87. CONTENTIONS FOE PKE-EMINENCE AMONG THE DISCIPLES.
THE LOVE OF JESUS FOE CHILDREN.

Tlie three first evangelists narrate several contentions for pre-
eminence which arose among the disciples, with tlie manner in
wliicli Jesus composed tliese differences.   One such contention,
wliicli is said to have arisen among the disciples after tlie trans-
figuration, and the first prediction of tlie passion, is common to all
tlie gospels (Matt. xviii. 1 ff.; Mark ix. 33 ft. ; Luke ix. 46 ft.).
There are indeed divergencies in tlie narratives, but tlie identity of
the incident on wliicli they are founded is attested by tlie fact, tliat
in all of them, Jesus sets a little child before his disciples as an
example; a scene wliicli, as Schleiermacher rcmarks,t would hardly
be. repeated. Mattliew and Mark concur in mentioning a dispute
about pre-eminence, wliicli was excited by tlie two sons ofZebedee.
These disciples (according to Mark), or their mother for them
(according to Mattliew), petitioned for the two first places next to

* Tliat which decided tlie evangelist to place tlie visit after the parable of the sower,
was probably not, as Schleiermacher thinks, a real chronological connexion. On the con-
trary, we recognize tlie usual characteristic of his arrangement, in the transition from the
concludi.'ig sentence in tlie explanation of the parable : these are Ihry-ie/to hnvwy heard tfie
word, ker.p it, o.wl linny forth, fruit iril!i patience, to the simihir expression of Jesus on tlie
occasion of the vi-it: iho^e 'n'ho lic<n' the word cf God and do it.

432

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

Jesus in the messianic kingdom (Matt. xx. 20 ff.; Mark x. 35 ff.).*
Of such a request on the part of the sons of Zcbedee, the third
evangelist knows nothing; but apart from this occasion, there is a
further contention for pre-eminence, on which discourses are uttered,
similar to those which tlie two first evangelists have connected with
the above petition. At the last supper of wliicli Jesus partook with
his disciples before his passion, Luke makes tlic latter fall into a
(fn^oveiK'ia (disp-iite) which among them shall be the greatest; a
dispute wliicli Jesus seeks to quell by tlie same reasons, and partly
with the same words, that Mattliew and Mark give in connexion
with tlie ayavaKTricsic; (indignation'), excited in tlie disciples generally
by the request of tlie sons of Zebedee. Luke here reproduces a
sentence which lie, in common with Mark, liad previously given
almost in the same form, as accompanying tlie presentation of the
cliild ; and which Matthew lias, not only on the occasion of Salome's
prayer, but also in the great anti-pharisaic discourse (comp. Luke
xxii. 26; Mark ix. 35; Luke ix. 48; Matt. xx. 26 f., xxiii. 11).
However credible it may be that with the worldly messianic hopes
of tlie disciples, Jesus should often have to suppress disputes among
them on the subject of their future rank in the Messiah's kingdom,
it is by no means probable that, for example, the sentence, Who-
soever zuill be great amony you, let him be the servant of all:

should be spoken, 1st, on the presentation of tlic cliild ; 2ndly, in
connexion witli tlie prayer of the sons of Zebedee; Srdly, in the
anti-pharisaic discourse, and 4thly, at the last supper.  There is
here obviously a traditional confusion, whether it be (as Sieffert in
such cases is fond of supposing') tliat several originally distinct
occurrences have been assimilated by tlic legend, i. e. the same
discourse erroneously repeated on various occasions ; or that out of
one incident tlic legend lias made many, i. e. lias invented various
occasions for tlie same discourse. Our decision between these two
possibilities must depend on tlie answer to tlie following question:

Have tlie various facts, to which the analogous discourses on hu-
mility are attached, tlie dependent appearance of mere frames to the
discourses, or tlie independent" one of occurrences tliat carry their
trutli and significance in themselves.

It will not be denied that tlic petition of the sons of Zebedee,
is in itself too specific and remarkable to be a mere background to
the ensuing discourse; and the same judgment must be passed on
the scene with tlie child: so tliat we have already two cases of con-

* Schuiz, (uler das Abendmahl S. 320) speaks consistently with the tone of tlie
recent criticism on Matthew wlien lie asserts, that he does not doubt fur a moment that
every observant reader will, without hesitation, prefer the representation of Mark, wlio
without mentioning the mother, confines the whole transaction to Jesus and tlie two apost-
les. But so far as historical probability is concerned, I would ask, why should not a
woman, who was one of the female companions of Jesus (.Matt. xxvii. 56), have ventured
on such a petition? As regards psychological probability, tlie sentiment of Iho church,
in the choice of the passage lor St. James's day, lias usually decided in favour of MAtthcw ;

for so solemn a prayer, uttered on the spur of the moment, is just in character witli a

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OS JESUS.

433

tention for pre-eminence subsisting in themselves.   If we would
assign to each of these occurrences its appropriate discourses, tlie
declarations which Matthew connects witli tlie presentation of tlie
child: Unless ye become as this child, dec., and, Whosoever shall
humble himself as this child, cC'c., evidently belong to this occasion.
On tlie other hand, the sentences on ruling and serving in tlic world
and in the kingdom of Jesus, seem to be a perfectly suitable com-
ment on the petition of the sons of Zebedee, with which Matthew
associates tlicm: also the saying about tlie first and the last, the
greatest and the least, wliich Mark and Luke give so early as at
the scene with tlie child, Matthew seems rightly to have reserved.
for the scene with tlie sons of Zebedee. It is otherwise with the
contention spoken of by Luke (xxii. 24 ff.). Tills contention origi-
nates in no particular occasion, nor does it issue in any strongly
marked scene, (unless we clioosc to insert Iiere tlie washing of tlie
disciples' feet, described by John, wlio, for tlic rest, mentions no
dispute;-of wliicli scene, however, we cannot treat until we come
to tlic history of the Passion.) On the contrary, this contention is
ushered in merely by tlie words, sysve-o de nai ^i^oveinia EV av-o7c,-
nearly the same by whi-ch tlic first contention is introduced, ix. 46,-
and leads to a discourse from Jesus, which, as we have already no-
ticed, Matthew and Mark represent him to have delivered in con-
nexion with the earlier instances of rivalry: so tliat this passage of
Luke lias nothing peculiarly its own, beyond its position, at tlie last
supper.  This position, however, is not very secure; for that im-
mediately after tlic discourse on the betrayer, so humiliating to the
disciples, pride should so strongly have taken possession of them,
is as difficult to believe, as it is easy to discover, by a comparison
of v. 23 and 24, how the "writer might be led, witliout historical
grounds, to insert here a. contention for pre-eminence. It is clear
tliat tlie words nal avTO't r'fp^avTO (Jv^rj-elv wp&c sav-ovg, -b, -ic; apa e'irf
eS; avrGiv 6 -ov~o /(e/l/ldw Ttpdaauv; suggested to him tlie similar ones,
eyevETO 6e /cat cf>i^oveiitia ev avroig, -o, T(^' avruv Sonsl elvai [zsi^uv ;

that is, tlie disputes about the betrayer called to his remembrance
the disputes about pre-eminence. One such dispute indeed, he had
already mentioned, but had only connected with it, one sentence
excepted, the discourses occasioned by the exhibition of the child;

he liad yet in reserve those which tlie two first evangelists attach
to the petition of tlie sons of Zebedee, an occasion wliicli seems not
to have been present to tlie mind of tlie third evangelist, whence lie
introduces tlie discourses pertaining to it here, with tlie general state-
ment tliat they originated in a contention for pre-eminence, wliich
broke out among tlie disciples. Meanwhile the chronological position,
also, of tlie two first-named disputes about rank, lias very little
probability; for in both instances, it is after a prediction of tlie pas-
sion, which, like tlic prediction of the betrayal, would seem calcu"
lated to suppress such thoughts of earthly ambition.* We therefore

434

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

welcome tlie indication which tlic evangelical narrative itself presents,
of tlic manner in which tlic narrators were led unhistorically to such
an arrangement.  In tlic answer of Jesus to tlic prayer of Salome,
the sail-cut point was tlic suffering tliat awaited him and Ills dis-
ciples ; hence by tlic most natural association of ideas, the ambition
of the two disciples, the antidote to which was tlie announcement
of approaching trial, was connected with tlie prediction of tlie pas-
sion. Again, oil tlic first occasion of rivalry, tlie preceding prediction
of tlic passion leads in Mark and Luke to tlic observation, that tlic
disciples did not understand tlic words of Jesus, and yet feared to
ask liiin conccrnino' them, whence it may be inferred tliat they de-
bated and disputed on tlie subject among themselves; here, then,
the association of ideas caused tlie evangelists to introduce the con-
tention for pre-eminence, also carried on in tlie absence of Jesus.
This explanation is not applicable to tlic narrative of Matthew, for
tticre, between tlie prediction of tlic passion and tlie dispute of tlic
disciples, tlie anecdote of the coin angled for by Peter, intervenes.

With tlic above contentions for pre-eminence, another anecdote
is indirectly connected by means of tlic cliild which is put forward
on one of tliosc occasions.  Children are brought to Jesus tliat lie
may bless them ; tlie disciples wish to prevent it, but Jesus speaks
the encouraging words, Suffer little children to coma v.nto rize, and
adds that only for children, and tliose wlio resemble children, is the
kingdom of heaven destined (Matt. xix. 13 ff.; Mark x. 13 ff.; Luke
xviii. 15 ff.). Tills narrative lias many points of resemblance to tliat
of the cliild placed in tlic midst of tlie disciples.  Istly, in both,
Jesus presents children as a model, and" declares that only those
who resemble children can enter tlic kingdom of God; 2ndly, in
both, tlie disciples appear in tlie liglit of opposition to children; and,
3rdly, in botli, Mark says, that Jesus took tlic children in his arms
(eray/ca/lio-a^ei'oc.) If these points of resemblance be esteemed ade-
quate ground for reducing tlie two narratives to one, tlie latter must,
beyond all question, be retained as the nearest to truth, because the
saying of Jesus, Siijfcr little children &c. which, from its rctainin"'
tills original form in all the narratives, bears the stamp of genuine-
ness, could scarcely have been uttered on the other occasion; where-
as, tlie sentences on children as patterns of humility, given in
•connection with the contention about rank, might very well have
been uttered under tlie circumstances above described, in retrospec-
tive allusion to previous contentions about rank. Nevertheless, tills
might rather be tlie place for supposing an assimilation of originally
diverse occurrences, since it is at least evident, tliat Mark lias in-
serted tlie expression evavKa/ltffa/.iei'oi: in both, simply on account of
tlie resemblance between the two scenes.

§ 88. THE PURIFICATION OF THE TEMPLE.

JESUS, during Ids first residence in Jerusalem, according to John

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

435

12 ff. paralL), undertook the purification of the temple. The ancient

commentators thought, and many modern ones still think,* tliat
these were separate events, especially as, besides tlie clironolo"-ical
difference, there is some divergency between the three first cvano-e-
lists and the fourth in their particulars. While, namely, the former,
in relation to the conduct of Jesus, merely speak in general terms
of an expulsion eK0dA^eiv, John says that he made a scourge of
small cords ^pay&'.Utov en ffyomwv, for tills purpose: again, wliilc
according to tlie former, lie treats all tlie sellers alike, he appears,
according to Jolm, to make some distinction, and to use the sellers
of doves somewhat more mildly; moreover, John does not say tliat
he drove out tlie buyers, as well as tlic sellers. There is also a dif-
ference as to tlie language used by Jesus on tlie occasion; in tlie
synoptical gospels, it is given in the form of an exact quotation
from tlic Old Testament; in John, merely as a free allusion. But,
above all, there is a difference as to tlie result: in the fourth gospel,
Jesus is immediately called to account; in tlie synoptical gospels,
we read nothing of this, and according to them, it is not until the
following day tliat tlie Jewish authorities put to Jesus a question,
wliicli seems to have reference to tlie purification of tlic temple
(Matt. xxi. 23 ff.^, and to which Jesus replies quite otherwise tlian
to the remonstrance in the fourth gospel. To explain .tlie repetition
of such a measure, it is remarked that the abuse was not likely to
cease on tlic first expulsion, and tliat on every revival of it, Jesus
would feel himself anew called on to interfere; that, moreover, tlie
temple purification in John is indicated to be an earlier event than
that in the synoptical gospels, by the circumstance, tliat tlie fourth
evangelist represents Jesus as being immediately called to accoi.mr,
wliile his impunity in the other case appears a natural consequence
of the heightened consideration which lie had in the meantime won.

But allowing to these divergencies their full weight, tlie agree-
ment between tlic two narratives preponderates.  We liave in botli
tlie same abuse, tlie same violent mode of checking it, by casting out
(eitpd^ew) the people, and overt In'owing (avaorpE^eiv) tlie tables;

nay, virtually, tlic same language in justification of this procedure,
for in Jolm, as well as in tlie other gospels, tlie words of Jesus con-
tain a reference, though not a verbally precise one, to Isai. Ivi. 7;

Jer. vii. 11.  These important points of resemblance must at. least
extort sucli an admission as that of Sieffert,t namely, that the two
occurrences, originally but little alike, were assimilated by tradition,
tlie features of tlic one being transferred to tlic other. But thus much
seems clear; the synoptists know as little of an earlier event of this
kind, as in fact of an earlier visit of Jesus to Jerusalem: and tlie
fourth evangelist seems to have passed over tlie purification of the
temple after tlie last entrance of Jesus into tlie metropolis, not be-
cause lie presumed it to be already known from tlie other gospels,

* Paulus and Tholuck, in loc.; Neander, I- J. Clir., S. 388, Anni.

rrfonrntln. 0 IHQ 4f

i Ucber dec

436 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

but because he believed that he must give an early date to the sole
act of tlie kind with which lie was acquainted. It" then each of the
evangelists knew only of one purification of tlie temple, we are not
warranted cither by the sliglit divergencies in the description of the
event, or by tlie important difference in its chronological position, to
suppose tliat there were two; since chronological differences are by
no means rare in the gospels, and are quite natural in writings of
traditional origin. It is therefore witli justice that our most modern
interpreters have, after tlie example of some older ones, declared
them selves in favour of tlie identity of tlie two histories.*

On wliicli side lies the error? We may know beforehand how
tlie criticism of the present day will decide on this question : namely,
in favour of tlie fourth gospel. According to Lueke, the scourge,
the diversified treatment of the different classes of traders, the more
indirect allusion to tlie Old Testament passage, are so many indica-
tions that the writer was an eye and ear witness of tlie scene he de-
scribes ; while as to chronology, it is well known tliat this is in no
decree regarded by the synoptists, but only by John, whence, ac-
cording to Sicffert,t to surrender tlie narrative of the latter to tliat
of the former, would be to renounce the certain for tlie uncertain.
As to John's dramatic details, we may match them by a particular
peculiar to Mark, And they would not suffer that any man should
carry any vessel through the temple (v. 16), which besides has a
support in tlie Jewish custom wliicli did not permit tlie court of tlie
temple to be made a thoroughfare.:}: If, nevertheless, tills particular
is put to tlie account of Mark's otherwise ascertained predilection for
arbitrary embellishment, § wliat authorizes us to regard similar ar-
tistic touches from tlie fourth evangelist, as necessary proofs of his
having been an eye witness ? To appeal here to his character of eye
witness as a recognized fact, [| is too glaring a petitio princzpii, at
least in the point of view taken by a comparative criticism, in wliicli
the decision as to whether the artistic details of tlie fourth evangelist
are mere embellishments, must depend solely on intrinsic probability.
Although the different treatment of tlie different classes of men is in
itself a probable feature, and tlie freer allusion to the Old Testament
is at least an indifferent one; it is quite otherwise with the most
striking feature in tlie narrative of John. Origen has set tlie ex-
ample of objecting to tlie twisting and application of tlie scourge of
small cords, as far too violent and disorderly a procedure.^ Modern
interpreters soften tlie picture by supposing tliat Jesus used the
scourge merely against tlie cattle*"" (a supposition, however, opposed
to the text, which represents all -navra<; as being driven out by tlie
scourge); yet still they cannot avoid perceiving tlie use of a scourge
at all to be unseemly in a person of the dignity of Jesus, and only

* Lttcke, 1, S. 435 ff.; De Wette, exeg. Handb. i. 1, S. 174 f.; i. 3, S. 40i  t Ut
sup. S. 109 ; Comp. Schneckenhurger, S. 26 f. \ Lightfoot, S. C32, from Bab. Jevamoth,
f. vi, 2.  § Lueke, S. 438. || Lueke, S. 437 ; Sieffert, S. 110. ^ Comm. in Joh. torn.
10, 9 17 ; Opp. 1, p. 822, cd. Lommatzsch. ** Kuinol, in loc.

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

437

calculated to aggravate the already tumultuary character of tlie pro-
ceeding.* The feature peculiar to Mark is encumbered with no such
difficulties, and while it is rejected, is this of John .to be received ?
Certainly not, if we can only find an indication in wliat way tlie
fourth evangelist might be led to the free invention of such a parti-
cular. Now it is evident from tlie quotation v. 17, which is peculiar
to him, tliat lie looked on the act of Jesus as a demonstration of
holy zeal-a sufficient temptation to exaggerate tlie traits of zcal-
ousness in his conduct.

In relation to tlie chronological difference, we need only remem-
ber how tlie fourth evangelist antedates tlie acknowledgment, of Je-
sus as the Messiali by tlie disciples, and the conferring of the name
of Peter on Simon, to be freed from tlie common assumption of his
pre-eminent chronological accuracy, wliicli is alleged in favour of Ills
position of the purification of tlie temple. For this particular case,
however, it is impossible to show any reason wliy the occurrence in
question would better suit tlie time of the first, tlian of the last pass-
over visited by Jesus, whereas there are no sliglit grounds for tlie
opposite opinion. It is true that nothing in relation to chronology is
to be founded on the improbability that Jesus sliould so early have re-
ferred to Ills death and resurrection, as lie must have done, according
to John's interpretation of the saying about tlie destruction and re-
building of tlie temple ;f for we shall see, in tlie proper place, tliat
this reference to tlie death and resurrection, owes its introduction
into tlie declaration of Jesus to tlie evangelist alone. But it is no
inconsiderable argument against John's position of the event, that
Jesus, with his prudence and tact, would hardly have ventured tlius
early on so violent an exercise of his messianic authority.} For in
that first period of his ministry lie had not given himself out as tlie
Messiali, and under any other than messianic authority, such a step
could than scarcely have been hazarded; moreover, he in tlie be-
ginning rather chose to meet his cotemporaries on friendly ground,
and it is therefore hardly credible that he should at once, without
trying milder means, have adopted an appearance so antagonistic.
But to tlie last week of his life such a scene is perfectly suited.
Then, after his messianic entrance into Jerusalem, it was his direct
aim in all tliat lie did and said, to assert his mcssiahship, in defiance
of tlie contradiction of his enemies ; then, all lay so entirely at stake,
tliat nothing more was to be lost by such a step.

As regards the nature of the event, Origen long ago thought it
incredible, that so great a multitude sliould have unresistingly sub-
mitted to a single man,-one, too, whose claims had ever been obsii-

* Brctclmcidcr, Probal). p. 43.   f English Commentators, ap. Lueke, 1, S. 435 f.
Anm. f Eng. Cumin, ap Lueke. According to Keander (S. 387, Anm.), Jesus, after his
last entrance into Jerusalem, when the enthusiasm of tlie populace was on his side, must
have shunned every act that could be interpreted into a design of using external force, and
thus creating disturbances. But lie must equally have shunned this at the beginning, as
at the end, of his career, and the proceeding in tlie temple was rather a provocation of
external force against himself, than a use of it for his own purposes.

438

THE LIFE Off JESU8.

nately contested: his only resource in this exigency is to appeal to
tlie superhuman power of Jesus, by virtue of which lie was able sud-
denly to extinguish tlie wrath of Ills enemies, or to render it impo-
tent ; and hence Origen ranks tills expulsion among tlie greatest
miracles of Jesus.* Modern expositors decline the miracle,! but
Paulus is tlie only one among them wlio lias adequately wciglicd
Origen's remark, that in tlie ordinary course of tilings tlie multitude
would have opposed themselves to a single person.  Whatever may
be said of tlie surprise caused by the suddenness of tlie appearance
of Jesus:}: (if, as John relates, lie made himself a scourge of cords, he
would need some time for preparation), of the force of right on Ills
side§ (on the side of those whom lie attacked, however, there was
established usa°'e); or, finally, of the irresistible impression produced
by tlie personality of Jesus || (on usurers and cattle-dealers-on brute-
men, as Paulus calls them ?) : still, such a multitude, certain as it
might be of tlie protection of tlie priesthood, would not have unre-
sistingly allowed themselves to be driven out of tlie temple by a
single man.  Hence Paulus is of opinion tliat a number of others,
equally scandalized by the sacrilegious traffic, made common cause
with Jesus, and that to their united strength tlie buyers and sellers
were compelled to yicld.*[ But this supposition is fatal to tlie entire
incident, for it makes Jesus tlie cause of an open tumult; and it is
not easy either to reconcile this conduct with his usual aversion to
every tiling revolutionary, or to explain the omission of his enemies
to use it as an accusation against him. For tliat they held them-
selves bound in conscience to admit tliat tlie conduct of Jesus was
justifiable in this case, is tlie less credible, since, according to a rab-
binical authority,** the Jews appear to have been so far from taking
umbrage at tlie market in tlie court of tlie Gentiles (and this is all
we are to understand by tlie word (epw),-)-)- tliat the absence of it
seemed to them like a melancholy desolation of the temple. Accord-
ing to this, it is not surprising tliat Origcn casts a doubt on the his-
torical value of this narrative, by the expression, dye Kai avrfj -yeye-
vrf-ai, (jf it really happened}, and at most admits that the evange-
list, in order to present an idea allegorically, K<U yeycviy&vu ovr&-
^pi'ioa-o TTpdypan (cdso borrowed the form of an actual occurrence).^

But in order to contest the reality of this history, in dcilancc of
the agreement of all tlie four evangelists, tlie negative grounds
hitherto adduced must be seconded by satisfactory positive ones,
from whence it might be seen how the primitive Christian legend
could be led to tlie invention of such a scene, apart from any his-
torical foundation. But tliese appear to be wanting. For our only
positive data in relation to tills occurrence arc tlie passages cited by
the synoptists from Tsaiali and Jeremiah, prohibiting tliat the temple

* Comm. in Joli. Tom. 10,16, p. 321 f. ed. Lominatzsell. -f Lucke, in loo. \ Lucke,
S. 413.   § Hi. anil Tholuck, in loc.   ]| Olshausen, ), S. 785.   ^ Comment. 4, S. 10-1:.
** IIieros.'Joli. tolih. f. Ixi. 3, ap. Liglitioot, p. 411.   ft Lucke, Comment. 1, S. 410.

++ T't -illll rllllll). also Wool<l311, Uisc. I.

EVENTS IN THE PL^LIC LIFE OF JESUS.

439

should be made a den of robbers; and the passage from Malachi iii.
1-3, according to which it was expected that in the messianic times
Jehovah would suddenly come to his temple, that no one would stand
before his appearing, and that lie would undertake a purification of
the people and tlie worship. Certainly tliese passages seem to have
some bearing on the irresistible reforming activity of Jesus in tlie
temple, as described by our evangelists; but there is so little indi-
cation tliat they liad reference in particular to the market in the outer
court of the temple, tliat it seems necessary to suppose an actual op-
position on tlie part of Jesus to this abuse, in order to account for
the fulfilment of the above prophecies by him being represented
under the form of an expulsion of buyers and sellers.

§ 89. NAREATIVES OF THE ANOINTIXG OF JESL'S BY A WOMAN.
i

AN occasion on which Jesus was anointed by a woman as lie sat
at meat, is mentioned by all the evangelists (Matt. xxvl. 6 ff.; Mark
xiv. 3 ft.; Luke vii. 36 ff.; John xii. 1 ff.), but witli some diver-
gencies, the most important of wliich lie between Luke and the other
three.  First, as to tlie chronology; Luke places tlie incident in tlie
earlier period of tlie life of Jesus, before his departure from Galileo,
while the other three assign it to tlie last week of his life ; secondly,
as to tlie character of tlie woman who anoints Jesus : she is, accord-
ing to Luke, a voman wJw 'icas a sinner, yvvfi afzap-UAo^ ; according
to tlie two other synoptists, a person of unsullied reputation; ac-
cording to John, who is more precise, Mary of Betliany. From tlie
second point of difference it follows, tliat in Luke tlie objection of
the spectators turns on tlie admission of so infamous a person, in tlie
other gospels, on tlie wastefulness of tlie woman; from botli, it fol-
lows, tliat Jesus in his defence dwells, in the former, on the grateful
love of the woman, as contrasted with the haughty indifference of
the Pharisees, in tlie latter, on his approaching departure, in opposi-
tion to the constant presence of tlie poor.  There are yet tlie minor
differences, that tlie place in wliich the entertainment and the an-
ointing occur, is by tlie two first and the fourth evangelists called
Betliany (wliich according to John xi. 1, was a nwfiT] town), by Luke
a 7-6/uc (city), without any more precise designation; further, tliat
the objection, according to tlie three former, proceeds from the dis-
ciples, according to Luke, from the entertainer. Hence tlie majority
of commentators distinguish two anointings, of which one is narrated
by Luke, the other by tlie three remaining evangelists.*

But it must be asked, if tlie reconciliation of Luke with tlie other
three evangelists is despaired of, whether the agreement of the latter
amongst themselves is so decided, and whether we must not rather
proceed, from the distinction of two anointings, to tlie distinction of

* Tims Paulus, expg. Hanclb. 1. B. S. 766 ; L. 3. 1, a, S. 293 ; Tholuck, Lucke,
Olshausen. in loc.; Hase, L. J. §. 'JG. Anin.

440 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

three, or even four ? To four certainly it will scarcely extend ; for
Mark does not depart from Matthew, except in a few tonclies of his
well-known dramatic manner; but between these two evangelists on
the one side, and John on tlie other, there are differences which may
fairly be compared with those between Luke and the rest. The first
difference relates to tlie house in which tlie entertainment is said to
have been given; according to the. two first evangelists, it was the
house of Simon tlie leper, a person elsewhere unnoticed; tlie fourth
does not, it is true, expressly name the liost, but since lie mentions
Martha as tlie person wlio waited on tlie guests, and lier brother
Lazarus as one of those who sat at meat, there is no doubt that he
intended to indicate tlie house of the latter as the locality of tlie re-
past.* Neither is the time of the occurrence precisely tlie same, for
according to Matthew and Mark tlie scene takes place after tlie
solemn entrance of Jesus into Jerusalem, only two days at the ut-
most before the passovcr; according to John, on the other hand,
before tlie entrance, as early as six days prior to tlie passover.f
I'urther, the individual whom John states to be tliat Mary of Bc-
tliany so intimately united to Jesus, is only known to the two first
evangelists a a woman, yvvtj ,-f- neither do they represent her as being.
like Mary, in tlie house, and one of tlie host's family, but as coming,
one knows not whence, to Jesus, wliile lie reclined at, table. More-
over tlie act of anointing is in tlie fourth gospel another than in tlie
two first. In tlie latter, the woman pours her ointment of spikenard
on the liead of Jesus; in John, on tlie contrary, slie anoints his feet,
and dries them with her haii-4 a difference which gives tlie whole
scene a new character. Lastly, tlie two synoptists are not aware
tliat it was Judas wlio gave utterance to tlie censure against tlie
woman ; Mattliew attributing it to tlie disciples, Mark, to tlie spec-
tators generally. §

Thus between tlie narrative of John, and that of Matthew and
Mark, there is scarcely less difference than between the account of
tliese tliree collectively, and that of Luke: whoever supposes two dis-
tinct occurrences in tlie one case, must, to be consistent, do so in tlie
other; and thus, witli Origen hold, at least conditionally, tliat there
were three separate anointings.  So soon, however, as this conse-
quence is more closely examined, it must create a difficulty, for how
improbable is it that Jesus should have been expensively anointed
three times, eacli time at a feast, cadi time by a woman, that woman
being always a different one; that moreover Jesus should, in eacli
instance, have liad to defend tlie act of tlie woman against the cen-
sures of the spectators '.^ Above all, how is it to be conceived tliat
after Jesus, on one and even on two earlier occasions, liad so de-

* Tins diifcn'nce struck Origen, who has given a critical comparison of these four
narratives, to which, in point of acumen, there is no parallel in more modern commenta-
ries. See Ills in Muttlt. Coiaiiientarlor. series, Opp. ed. de la Kue, 3, S. 892 ft.

^ Origenes, lit sup.

I Ib.  § Ib.  || Ib.

<T (^oinn. St'lllfii'rnniclier iihp.r df.n T.nlcaa- S- 111-

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

441

cidedly given his sanction to the honour rendered to him, the dis-
ciples, or one of them, should have persisted in censurino- it ?*

These considerations oblige us to think of reductions, and it is
the most natural to commence with tlie narratives of tlie two first
synoptlsts and of John, for tliese agree not only in tlie place, Be-
thany, but also, generally, in tlie time of tlie event, the last week
of the life of Jesus; above all, tlie censure and tlie reply are nearly
the same on both sides. In connexion witli tliese similarities the
differences lose their importance, partly from tlie improbability that
an incident of tills kind should be repeated ; partly from the proba-
bility, tliat in tlie traditional propagation of the anecdote sucli di-
vergencies should have insinuated themselves. But if in tills case
the identity of tlie occurrences be admitted, in consideration of tlie
similarities, and in spite of tlie dissimilarities; then, on tlie other
hand, tlie divergencies peculiar to tlie narrative of Luke, can no
longer hinder us from pronouncing it to be identical with tliat of tlie
tliree other evangelists, provided tliat there appear to be only a few
important points of resemblance between tlie two. And such really
exist, for Luke now strikingly accords with Matthew and Mark, in
opposition to John; now, witli tlie latter, in opposition to the
former.   Luke gives tlie entertainer the same name as the two
first synoptists, namely, Simon, tlie only difference being, tliat the
former calls him a p/iarisee, wliile the latter style him the leper.
Again, Luke agrees with tlie other synoptists in opposition to
John, in representing tlie woman wlio anoints Jesus as a nameless
individual, not belonging to tlie house; and further, in making lier
appear witli a box of ointment, dM^aa-pov p.vpov, while Jolm speaks
only of abound of ointment, Ai-pa iwpov, without specifying tlie
vessel. On tlie other hand, Luke coincides in a remarkable manner
witli John, and differs from tlie two other evangelists, as to tlie mode
of tlie anointing.  Wliile, namely, according to the latter, the oint-
ment is poured on tlie licad of Jesus, according to Luke, tlie woman,
who zcas a sinner, as, according to John, Mary, anoints tlie feet of
Jesus; and even tlie striking particular, tliat slie dried them with
her hair,t is given by botli in nearly tlie same words; excepting
tliat in Luke, where tlie woman is described as a sinner, it is added
•that slie bathed tlie feet of Jesus with her tears, and kissed them.
Thus, witliout doubt, we have here but one history under tliree
various forms; and this seems to liave been the real conclusion of
Origen, as well as recently of Schleiermacher.

In this state of tlie case, tlie effort is to escape as cheaply as
possible, and to save tlie divergencies of tlie several evangelists at
least from tlie appearance of contradiction. First, witli regard to
'the differences between the two first evangelists and the last, it lias
been attempted to reconcile the discrepant dates by the supposition,

* Orig-i-nca and Sfhicirrniaclier. Winer, N. T. Grannn S. 1+0.

-f- Luke vii. ;S>S : rorr 7ru(5rtc a'i'Tov-Tal^ John xii. ;i: e^i^in^s ra^ ^pi^v avTy^ Tftitf

Sni~, -,:r i;fA I'/.T.rnSTLr f'-linni-F                  tTOtiaC 01-01'.

442 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

that the meal at Bethany was held really, as John informs us, six
days before Easter; but tliat Matthew, after whom Mark wrote, lias
no contradictory date; tliat rather lie lias no date at all; for though
lie inserts the narrative of the meal and tlie anointing after tlic dec-
laration of Jesus, that after two days is the feast of the Passover,
GTI. pe-a 6vo fjpEpac; TO vda\a yiverai, this does not prove tliat lie in-
tended to place it later as to time, for it is probable tliat he gave it
this position simply because lie wished to note here, before coming
to tlic betrayal by Judas, the occasion on which tlie traitor first em-
braced his black resolve, namely, tlic repast at wliicli lie was incensed
by Mary's prodigality, and embittered by tlie rebuke of Jesus.*
But in opposition to tills, modern criticism lias shown that, on the
one hand, in tlie mild and altogether general reply of Jesus there
could lie nothing personally offensive to Judas; and that, on the
other hand, tlie two first gospels do not name Judas as tlie party
who censured tlie anointing, but tlie disciples or tlie bystanders
generally: whereas, if they liad noted tills scene purely because it was
the motive for tlie treachery of Judas, tlicy must have especially point-
ed out tlie manifestation of his feeling, f There remains, consequently,
a chronological contradiction in flits instance between the two first
synoptists and John: a contradiction which even Olshausen admits.^

It lias been attempted in a variety of ways to evade tlie farther dif-
ference as to tlie person of tlie host. As Matthew and Mark speak only
of tlie house of Simon the leper, olida ^ifiuvog TOV ^e-pov some have
distinguished tlie owner of tlie house, Simon, from tlic giver of the
entertainment, wlio doubtless was Lazarus, and liave supposed tliat
hence, in botli cases witliout error, tlie fourth evangelist mentions
the latter, tlic two first synoptists tlie former. § But wlio would
distinguish an entertainment by tlie name of tlie householder, if he
were not in any way tlie giver of the entertainment ? Again, since
John docs not expressly call Lazarus tlie host, but merely one of
the avvavaiieifiKvuv {those sitting at the table), and since tlie inference
that lie was the liost is drawn solely from tlie circumstance tliat his
sister Martha served di^om; others have regarded Simon as the
husband of Martha, either separated on account of his leprosy, or
already deceased, and have supposed tliat Lazarus then resided with
his widowed sister :|] an hypothesis which it is more easy to recon-
cile witli tlie narratives tlian the former, but which is unsupported
by any certain information.

We come next to tlie divergency relative to the mode of anoint-
ing ; according to the two first evangelists, tlie ointment was poured
on the licad of Jesus ; according to the fourth, on his feet. Tlie old,
trivial mode of harmonizing the two statements, by supposing that
botli the liead and the feet were anointed, lias recently been expanded
into tlie conjecture tliat Mary indeed intended only to anoint the feet

* Kuinul, Coinm. in Malth. p. G87. + Sieftert, tiber den Urspr. 8. 123 f. f K^I.
Comm. 2, S. 1:7.   § Yiil. Kuinul, ut sup. p. USS ; also Tholuck, S. 228.   || Paulua,

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

443

of Jesus (John), but that as slie accidentally broke tlie vessel (avv-
Tpt'l/'aoa, Mark), tlie ointment flowed over his head also (Matt.).*
This attempt at reconciliation falls into tlic comic, for as we cannot
imagine how a woman wlio was preparing to anoint tlie feet of Jesus
could bring the vessel of ointment over Ins liead, we must suppose
that tlie ointment spirted upwards like an effervescing draught. So
tliat here also tlic contradiction remains, and not only between Mat-
thew and John, where it is admitted even by Schneckenburger, but
also between tlie latter evangelist and Mark.

Tlic two divergencies relative to tlie person of tlie woman wlio
anoints Jesus, and to tlie party wlio blames her, were thought to be
tlie most readily explained.   Tliat what Jolm ascribes to Judas
singly, Mattliew and Mark refer to all tlie disciples or spectators,
was believed to be simply accounted for by tlic supposition tliat
while tlic rest manifested their disapprobation by gestures only, Ju-
das vented his in words.t   We grant tliat tlie word e/leyov, (f,hey
said) preceded as it is in Mark, by the words ayava,nrovvTK(; -n-poc
tw-oL'c (/laving indignation 'within themselves), and followed, as in
Mattliew, by tlie words yvoavg SE b 'IJ]<JOV(; (but Jesus knowing) docs
not necessarily imply tliat all tlie disciples gave audible expression
to their feelings ; as, however, tlie two first evangelists immediately
after this meal narrate tlie betrayal by Judas, tlicy would certainly
have named tlie traitor on tlie above occasion, liad lie, to their knowl-
edge, made himself conspicuous in connexion with the covetous
blame wliicli tlic woman's liberality drew forth. Tliat Jolm partic-
ularizes tlie woman, whose name is not given by tlie synoptists, as
Mary of Bethany, is, in tlie ordinary view, only an example how
the fourth evangelist supplies the omissions of his predecessors.^:

But as tlie two first synoptists attach so much importance to the
deed of tlie woman, tliat tlicy make Jesus predict the perpetuation
of her memory on account of it-a particular which Jolm lias not-
they would assuredly have also given her name had they known it;

so tliat in any case we may conclude thus much; tlicy knew not
wlio tlie woman was, still less did they conceive her to be Mary of
Bethany.

Thus if tlic identity only of tlie last evangelist's narrative with
tliat of tlic two first be acknowledged, it must be confessed tliat we
have, on tlic one side or tlic other, an account which is inaccurate,

* Schiieckcnburger, fiber den Ursprung, u. s. f S. 60. There is no trace in Mark'3
account that tlie words cwrpl^affa n) u"ML^acrpov signify an accidental fracture ; nor, on
the other hand can they, without tlie harshest ellipsis, be understood to imply merely the
removal of that which stopped the opening of the vessel, as Paulns and Fritzsche maintain.
Interpreted without viole'.ic', they can only mean a breaking of tlie vessel itself. It is ask-
ed with Paulus (vs.. llandb. 3. B. S. 471): To what purpose destroy a costly vessel ?
or with Frit/sclie Fin Marc. p. G02): To wliat purpose risk wounding lier own hand, and
possibly tlie licad of Jesus also ? These are questions which have a bearing on the matter
considered as the act of the woman, but not as a narrative of Mark; tot that to him, the
destruction of a precious vessel should appear suited to the noble prodigality of the wo-
man, is in perfect accordance with tlie exaggerating style which we have often observed
in him. + Kuim'.l, in Mattli. p. G8i).   t 1'aulus, exeg. Handb. 3. B. S. 466, and many
others.

444 THE LIFE OP JESUS.

and disfigured by tradition. It is, however, not only between these,
but also between Luke and his fellow evangelists collectively, that
they who suppose only one incident to be tlie foundation of their
narratives, seek to remove as far as possible the appearance of con-
tradiction.  Schlcicrmachcr, wliose highest authority is John, but
who will on no account renounce Luke, comes in tills instance, when
the two so widely diverge, into a peculiar dilemma, from wliicli he
must liave thought tliat lie could extricate himself with singular dex-
terity, since he lias not evaded it, as lie docs others of a similar kind,
by tlie supposition of two fundamental occurrences. It is true that
he finds himself constrained to concede, in favour of John, that
Luke's informant could not in this case liave been an eve witness;

wliencc minor divergencies, as for instance tliose relative to tlie lo-
cality, are to be explained. On the other hand, the apparently im-
portant differences that, according to Luke, tlie woman is a sinner,
according to John, Mary of Bethany; tliat according to tlie former,
the host, according to the latter, the disciples, make objections; and
that tlie reply of Jesus is in tlie respective narrations totally differ-
ent-these, in Schleiermacher's opinion, liave their foundation in the
fact that. tlie occurrence may be regarded from two points of view.
The one aspect of the occurrence is tlie murmuring of tlie disciples,
and this is given by Matthew; the other, namely, tlie relations of
Jesus with tlie pharisaic host, is exhibited by Luke ; and John con-
firms botli representations. The most decided impediment to the
reconciliation of Luke with tlie other evangelists, his designation of
the woman as a sinner, a^ap-y/loc, Schleiermachcr invalidates, by
calling it a false inference of tlie narrator from tlie address of Jesus
to Mary, Thy sins are forgiven thee, a^ewrai aoi al wap-iai. This
Jesus might say to Mary in allusion to some error, unknown to us,
but such as tlie purest are liable to, without compromising her re-
putation with the spectators, wlio were well acquainted with her
character; and it was only tlie narrator wlio erroneously concluded
from tlie above words of Jesus, and from his further discourse, that
tlie woman concerned was a sinner in tlie ordinary sense of the word,
whence lie has incorrectly amplified the thoughts of tlie host, v. 39.*
It is not, however, simply of sins, a.y,ap-ia,i, but of many sins, "TO/I-
/la2 ajLtffpTtat, that Jesus speaks in relation to tlie woman; and if
this also be an addition of tlie narrator, to be rejected as such be-
cause it is inconsistent with tlie character of Mary of Bethany, tlien
lias the entire speecli of Jesus from v. 40-48, which turns on the
opposition between forgiving and loving little and much, been falsi-
fied or misrepresented by the evangelist: and on the side of Luke
especially, it is in vain to attempt to harmonize tlie discordant nar-
ratives.

If, then, the four narratives can be reconciled only by the sup-
position tliat several of them have undergone important traditional
modifications: the question is, which of them is tlie nearest to the

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OT JESUS.         445

original fact? That modern critics should unanimously decide in
favour of Jolm, cannot surprise us after our previous observations;

and as little can the nature of the reasoning by wliicli their judgment
is supported. The narrative of John, say they, (reasoninw in a
circle.) being tliat of an eye witness, must be at once supposed the
true one,* and this conclusion is sometimca rested for greater secu-
rity on tlie false premiss, that the more circumstantial and dramatic
narrator is tlie more accurate reporter-the eye witness.!  The
breaking of tlie box of ointment, in Mark, although a dramatic par-
ticular, is readily rejected as a mere embellishment; but does not
John's statement of tlie quantity of spikenard as a pound, border on
exaggeration ? and ought not the extravagance which Olshausen, in
relation to tins disproportionale consumption of ointment, attributes
to Mary's love, to be rather referred to the evangelist's imagination,
which would then also have tlie entire credit of tlie circumstance,
that the house was filled vnth the odozir of the ointment ? It ia
worthy of notice, tliat the estimate of the value of tlio perfume at
300 denarii, is given by Jolm and Mark alone; as also at tlie mi-
raculous feeding of the multitude, it is tliesc two evangelists wlio
rate the necessary food at 200 denarii. If Mark only had tills close
estimate, how quickly would it be pronounced, at least by Schleier-
maclier, a gratuitous addition of the narrator! What then is it that,
in tlie actual state of the case, prevents the utterance of this opinion,
even as a conjecture, but tlie prejudice in-favour of tlie fourth gos-
pel ? Even the anointing of tlie head, which is attested by two of
the synoptists, is, because John mentions the feet instead of the head,
rejected as unusual, and incompatible with the position of Jesus at
a meal ;f whereas the anointing of the feet with precious oil was far
less usual; and this tlie most recent commentator on the fourth gos-
pel admits. §

But peculiar gratitude is rendered to the eye witness John, be-
cause he has rescued from oblivion the names, both of the anointing
woman, and of tlie censorious disciple. || It has been supposed that
tlie synoptists did in fact know the name of the woman, but with-
held it from tlie apprehension that danger might possibly accrue to
tlie family of Lazarus, wliile John, writing later, was under no such
restraint if but this expedient rests on mere assumptions. Our for-
mer conclusion therefore subsists, namely, that the earlier evangelists
knew nothina; of tlie name of the woman; and tlie question arises,
how was this possible ? Jesus having expressly promised immortal
renown to tlie deed of tlie woman, tlie tendency must arise to per-
petuate her name also, and if tins were identical witli the known
and oft repeated name of Mary of Bethany, it is not easy to under-
stand how the association of the deed and the name could be lost in

• Siliffert, lit sup. S. 123 f.   + Schuiz, ut sup. S. 320 f.   f Schneckenburger, ut
aup. S.60.

(i Liickc, 2, S. 417 ; comp. Lightfoot, borae, p. 468, 1081.

I] Sclnilz, ut sup.

446 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

tradition, and the woman who anointed Jesus become nameless. It
is perhaps still more incomprehensible, supposing tlic covetous blame
cast upon the woman to have been really uttered by him who proved
the betrayer, that this should be forgotten in tradition, and the ex-
pression of blame attributed to the disciples generally. When a tact
is narrated of a person otherwise unknown, or even wlien tlic person
being known, tlic fact docs not obviously accord with his general
character, it is natural tliat the name should be lost in tradition; but
wlicn the narrated word or work of a person agrees so entirely witli
his known character, as docs tlic covetous and hypocritical blame in
question witli the character of tlie traitor, it is difficult to suppose
tliat tlie legend would sever it from his name. Moreover, tlic his-
tory in which tins blame occurs, verges so nearly on the moment of
tlie betrayal, (especially according to tlic position given to it by tlic
two first evangelists,) tliat liad tlic blame really proceeded from Ju-
das, tlie two facts would have been almost inevitably associated.
Nay, even if tliat expression of latent cupidity liad not really be-
longed to Judas, there must have been a temptation eventually to
ascribe it to him, as a help to tlie delineation of his character, and
to tlie explanation of his subsequent treachery. Thus tlie case is
reversed, and tlie question is whether, instead of praising John tliat
he lias preserved to us this precise information, we ought not rather
to give our approbation to the synoptists, tliat they have abstained
from so natural but unhistorical a combination. We can arrive at
no other conclusion with respect to tlie designation of tlic woman
who annoints Jesus as Mary of Bcthany. On tlie one hand, it is
inconceivable tliat tlie deed, if originally hers, should be separated
from her celebrated name; on tlie other, tlic legend, in tlic course
of its development, might naturally come to attribute to one whose
spiritual relations with Jesus liad, according to the third and fourth
gospels, early obtained great celebrity in tlie primitive church, an
act of devoted love towards him, which originally belonged to an-
other and less known person.

But from another side also we find ourselves induced to regard
tlie narratives of Matthew and Mark, who give no name to tlie
woman, rather than tliat of John, who distinguishes her as Mary of
Bcthany, as tlie parent stem of tlic group of anecdotes before us.
Our position of tlie identity of all tlie four narratives must, to be
tenable, enable us also to explain how Luke's representation of the
facts could arise. Now, supposing tlic narrative of John to be tlie
nearest to tlic truth, it i.a not, a little surprising tliat in tlie legend,
the anointing woman should doubly descend from the highly hon-
oured Mary, sister of Lazarus, to an unknown, nameless individual,
and thence even to a notorious sinner; it appears tar more natural
to give the intermediate position to tlie indifferent statement of tlie
synoptists, out of whose equivocal nameless woman might equally
be made, either in an ascending scale, a Mary; or, in a descending

EVENTS IX THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

447

The possibility of the first transformation has been already
shown: it must next be asked, where could be an inducement,
without historical grounds, gradually to invest the anointincr w'oman
with tlic character of a sinner ? In tlie narrative itself our only clue
is a feature wliicli the two first synoptists have not, but which John
has in common with Luke; namely that tlie v.'oman anointed the
feet of Jesus.  To tlie fourth evangelist, this tribute of feelin"' ap-
peared in accordance witli tlic sensitive, devoted nature of Mary,
whom lie elsewhere also (xi. 32), represents as falling at tlie feet of
Jesus; but by another it might be taken, as by Luke, for the gest-
ure of contrition ; an idea which might favour the conception of the
woman as a sinner.-Miglit favour, we say, not cause: for a cause;

we must search elsewhere,

§ 90.

OF MARY AND MARTHA.

IN tlie Gospel of John (viil. 1--11), tlic Pharisees and scribes
bring a woman taken in adultery to Jesus, tliat they may obtain
his opinion as to tlie procedure to be observed against her; whereupon
Jesus, by appealing to tlie consciences of the accusers, liberates tlie
woman, and dismisses her witli an admonition. The genulnenes of
this passage lias been strongly contested, nay, its spuriousness might
be regarded as demonstrated, were is not that even tlie most thor-
ough investigations of the subject* indirectly betray a design, which
Paulus openly avows, of warding off the dangerous surmises as to
tlie origin of the fourth gospel, which are occasioned by the supposi-
tion that this passage, encumbered as it is with improbabilities, is a
genuine portion of tliat gospel. For in tlic first place, tlie scribes
say to Jesus : closes in. the law commanded us that such should be
stoned: now in no part of the Pentateuch is this punishment pre-
scribed for adultery, but simply death, tlie mode of inflicting it being
left undetermined (Lev. xx. 10; Deut. xxii. 22); nor was stoning
for adultery a later intsitution of the Talmud, for according to the
canon: omne mortis suppl'icium, in scriptura absolute, positum,
esse strangulationem^ tlie punishment appointed for this offence in
tlie Talmud is strangulation.}  Further, it is difficult to discover
wdiat there was to ensnare Jesus in the question proposed to him; §
llie scribes quoted to him the commandment of the law, as if they
would warn him, rattier than tempt liirn, for they could not. expect
tliat lie would decide otherwise than agreeably to tlie law. Again,
the decision of Jesus is open to tlie stricture, tliat if only he who is
conscious of perfect purity were authorized to judge and punish, all
social order would be at an end. The circumstance of Jesus writ-
ing on the ground has a legendary and mystical air, for even if it be

* Ap. Wetstein, Paulus, Lucke, in loc. \ Mainmonides on Sanhedr. 7, 1.
t Mischna, tr. c. 10.   ^ For a thorough discussion of this and the following points,

448 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

not correctly explained by the gloss of Jerome: eorum videlicet, qui
accusabant, et omnium mortalium peccafa, it yet seems to imply
something more mysterious tlian a mere manifestation of contempt
for the accusers. Lastly, it is scarcely conceivable tliat every one
of those men. who dragged the woman before. Jesus, zealous for the
law, and adverse to his cause as they are supposed to be, should
have liad so tender a conscience, as on tlie appeal of Jesus to retire
without prosecuting their design, and leave tlic woman behind them
uninjured ; tins rather appears to belong merely to the legendary or
poetical embellishment of the scene. Yet however improbable it
may appear, from these observations, that tlie occurrence happened
precisely as it is here narrated, tills, as Brctschneidcr justly main-
tains,* proves nothing against tlie genuineness of tlie passage, since
it is arguing in a circle to assume the apostolic composition of the
fourth gospel, and tlie consequent impossibility that a narrative con-
taining contradictions sliould form a portion of it, prior to an exam-
ination of its several parts. Nevertheless, on tlie oilier hand, the
absence of tlie passage in the oldest authorities is so suspicious, that
a decision on the subject cannot be hazarded.

In any case, the narrative of an interview between Jesus and a
woman of tlie above character must be very ancient, since, accord-
ing to Euscbius, it was found in the gospel of the Hebrews, and in
the writings of Papias.f It was long thought tliat tlie woman men-
tioned in the Hebrew gospel and by Papias was identical witli the
adulteress in John; but against this it has been justly observed,
that one wlio liad tlie reproach of many sins, must be distinct from
her who was detected in the one act of adultery. ^. I wonder, how-
ever, that no one lias, to my knowledge, thought, in connexion witli
tlie passage of Eusebius, of the woman in Luke of whom Jesus says
that her many sins, d/zap-iai. TTO/IABI, are forgiven. It is true tliat the
word SiaQ^Odai]^ does not fully agree witli this idea, for Luke does
not speak of actual expressions of tlie Pharisee in disparagement of
the woman, but merely of the unfavourable thoughts wliicli lie liad
concerning her; and in this respect the passage in Euscbius would
agree better witli tlie narrative of John, wliicli lias an express de-
nunciation, a 6ia!3d^./(.siv.

Thus we are led on external grounds, by tlie doubt whether an
ancient notice refer to tlie one or the other of tlie two narratives, to
a perception of their amnity,§ which is besides evident from internal
reasons. In both we have a woman, a sinner, before Jesus; in both,
this woman is regarded with an evil eye by Pharisaic sanctimoni-
ousness, but is taken into protection by Jesus, and dismissed with
a friendly rropsvov, go. These were precisely the features, the origin
of which we could not understand in tlie narrative of Luke, viewed

* Probab. p. 72 ff.

•i- Euseb. II. E. iii. 39 : iitTc9eirai 6e (o IIam'af) /cat uU/zv laropiav ir-pi yvvcunuf; isl
»roA/la(C u.fiapr'i.a.if Stafff-iJSeiiJiif ETTI rov K.vpiov, f/v TO ica^)' 'Eppaiovf; svayye'Atov mptt'xci,
t Lucke, 2, S. 2)7. Paulus, Comm. 4, 8. 410.   {i Elsewhere also the two were con-

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

449

as a mere variation of the history of the anointing given by tlie oilier
evangelists. Now, wliat is more natural tlian to suppose tliat they
were transferred into Luke's liistory of tlic anointing, from that of
the forgiven sinner ? If the Christian legend possessed, on the one
side, a woman wlio had anointed Jesus, wlio was on tills account
reproached, but was defended by Jesus; and on the other side, a
woman who was accused before him of many sins, but whom lie
pardoned; how easily, aided by tlic idea of an anointing of tlie feet.
of Jesus, which bears tlie interpretation of an act of penitence, might
the two histories flow together-tlie anointing woman become also
a sinner, and tlie sinner also an anointer ? Then, tliat tlie scene of
the pardon was an entertainment, was a feature also drawn from the
liistory of the anointing: tlie entertainer must be a Pharisee, because
the accusation of tlic woman ought to proceed from a Pharisaic
party, and because, as we liave seen, Luke lias a predilection for .
Pharisaic entertainments. Lastly, tlie discourse of Jesus may have
been borrowed, partly from tlie original narrative of tlic woman wlio
was a sinner, partly from analogous occasions. If tlicso conjectures
be correct, tlie narratives arc preserved unmixcd, on the one hand,
by the two first evangelists ; on the other, by the fourtli, or whoever
was tlie author of the passage on tlie adulteress; ibr if tlie latter
contains much tliat is legendary, it is at least free from any admixt-
ure of the history of the anointing.

Having thus accounted for one modification of the narrative
concerning the anointing woman, namely, her degradation into a
sinner, by the influence of another and somewhat similar anecdote,
which was current in tlie first age of Christianity, we mav proceed
to consider experimentally, whether a like external influence may
not have helped to produce the opposite modification of tlie unknown
into Mary of Bethany: a modification which, for the rest, wo have
already seen to be easy of explanation.  Sucli an influence could
only proceed from tlie sole notice of Mary (with tlie exception of
her appearance at tlie resurrection of Lazarus) which lias been pre-
served to us, and wliicli is rendered memorable by tlie declaration
of Jesus, One thing is needful., anil Mary iiath chosen, &c. (Luke
x. 38 if.). We have, in fact, here as well as there, Martha occupied
in serving (Jolin xii. 2, nal fj WpOa Snywvsi; Luke x. 40, f] Sis
MdpOa •TCptwroTO Trepi •noXA.ffv 6iaK.oviav\; here, Mary sitting at tlie
feet of Jesus, there, anointing his feet; here, blamed by her sister,
there by Judas, for her useless conduct, and in botli cases, defended
by Jesus. It is surely unavoidable to say; if once tlie narrative
of tlie anointing of Jesus by a woman were current together with
that of Mary and Martha, it was very natural, from tlie numerous
points of resemblance between them, tliat they sliould be blended
in tlie legend, or by some individual, into one story; that tlie un-
known woman who anointed tlic feet of Jesus, who was blamed by
tlie spectators, and vindicated by Jesus, sliould be clianged into

Marv wlinrn traflitinn linrl (Irmir+pil in n smiiLnr sitnirtinn • flip. +;isk

450 THE LIFE OF JESU8.

of serving at the meal with which the anointing was connected
attributed to Mary's sister, Martha; and finally, her brother Lazarus
made a partaker of the meal:-so that here the narrative of Luke
on tlic one side, and that of tlie two synoptists on the other, appear
to be pure anecdotes, tliat of John a mixed one.

Further, in Luke's narrative of the visit of Jesus to the two
sisters, there is no mention of Lazarus, with whom, however,
according to Jolin (xi. and xii.), Mary and Martha appear to have
dwelt; nay, Luke speaks precisely as if the presence or existence
of this brother, whom indeed neitlier lie nor eitlier of the other sy-
noptists anywhere notices, were entirely unknown to him. For had
he known anything of Lazarus, or had he thought of him as present,
lie could not have said: -A certain woman, named Martha, re-
ceived him into her house; he must at least have named her brother
also, especially as, according to Jolin, the latter was an intimate
friend of Jesui. This silence is remarkable, and commentatora
have not succeeded in finding a better explanation of it tlian that
given in the natural liistory of tlic prophet of Nazareth, where tlie
shortly subsequent deatli of Lazarus is made available for tlic sup-
position that lie was, about the time of that visit of Jesus, on a
journey for tlie benefit of his health.* Not less striking is another
point relative to the locality of this scene. According to John,
Mary and Martlia dwelt in Bethany, a small town in tlie immediate
vicinity of Jerusalem; whereas Luke, when speaking of the visit
of Jesus to these sisters, only mentions a certain town, Kuy.rfv nva,
which is thought, however, to be easily reconciled with the statement
of John, by tlic observation, tliat Luke assigns the visit to tlie
journey of Jesus to Jerusalem, and to one travelling thither' out of
Galilee, Bethany would lie in tlie way.  But it would lie quite at
the end of this way, so tliat the visit of Jesus must fall at tlie close
of his journey, wliereas Luke places it soon after tlie departure out
of Galilee, and separates it from the entrance into Jerusalem by a
multitude of incidents filling eight entire chapters. Thus much
then is clear: the author or editor of the third Gospel was ignorant
that that visit was paid in Bethany, or tliat Mary and Martlia dwelt
there, and it is only that evangelist who represents Mary as tlie
anointing woman, who also names Bethany as the home of Mary:

tlie same place where, according to the two first synoptists, the
anointing occurred. If Mary were once made identical with tlie
anointing woman, and if the anointing were known to have happened
in Bethany, it would naturally follow that this town would be re-
presented as Mary's home. Hence it is probable tliat tlie anointing
woman owes lier name to the current narrative of tlie visit of Jesua
to Martha and Mary, and that Mary owes licr home to the narrative
of the meal at Betliany.

We sliould tlius have .1 group of five histories, among which
the narrative given by tlie two first synoptists of the anointing of

EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JE3U8.

451

Jesus by a woman, would form tlie centre, that in John of t lie
adulteress, and that m Luke of Mary and Martha, tlic extremes,
while the anointing by tlie sinner in Luke, and tliat by Mary in
John, would fill tlie intermediate places.  It is true tliat all the five
narratives might with some plausibility be regarded as varied edi-
tions of one historical incident; but from tlie essential dissimilarity
between tlie three to which I have assigned the middle and extreme
places, I am rattier of opinion tliat these are eacli founded on a
special incident, but that the two intermediate narratives are second-
ary formations which owe tlieir existence to the intermixture of tlic
primary ones by tradition.
