
DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIRST GOSPELS.   357

CHAPTER VI.

THE DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIEST GOSPELS.*

§. 76. THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT.

IN reviewing the public life of Jesus, we may separate from the
events tliose discourses which were not merely incidental, but which
stand independent and entire.  This distinction, however, is not
precise, for many discourses, owing to the occurrences that suggested
them, may be classed as events; and many events, from the expla-
nations annexed to tliem, seem to range themselves with the dis-
courses. Tlie discourses of Jesus given in tlie synoptical gospels,
and those attributed to him in tlie fourth, diner widely both in form
and matter, having only a few isolated sentences in common: they
must, therefore, be subjected to a separate examination. Again,
there is a dissimilitude between the three first evangelists : Mattliew
affects long discourses, and collects into one mass a number of say-
rigs, which in Luke are distributed among various places and occa-
lons; eacli of tliese two evangelists lias also some discourses pecu-


liar to himself. In Mark, tlie element of discourses exists in a very
small proportion.  Our purpose will, therefore, be best answered,
if we make Matthew's comprehensive discourses our starting point;

ascertain all the corresponding ones in tlie other gospels; inquire
which amongst them has tlie best arrangement and representation
of these discourses; and, finally, endeavour to form a judgment as
to liow far they really proceeded from tlie lips of Jesus.

Tlie first long discourse in Mattliew is tliat known as tlie sermon
on tlie mount (v.-vii.). The evangelist, having recorded tlie re-
turn of Jesus after his baptism into Galileo, and the calling of the
fishermen, informs us, that Jesus went through all Galileo, teaching
and healing; that great multitudes followed him from all parts of
Palestine; and that for their instruction lie ascended a mountain,
and delivered tlie sermon in question (iv. 23, ft). We seek in vain
for its parallel in Mark, but Luke (vi. 20-49) gives a discourse
which has the same introduction and conclusion, and presents in its
whole tenor tlie most striking similarity with that of Mattliew;

moreover, in botli cases, Jesus, at the termination of his discourse,
goes to Capernaum, and lieals tlie centurion's servant.  It is true
that Luke gives a later insertion to the discourse, for previous to it

368

Till: LIFI: OF JESU'5.

lie narrates many journeyings and cures of Jesus, which Matthew

places after it; and while tlic latter represents Jesus as ascending a
mountain, and being seated there during delivery of his discourse,
Luke says, almost in contradiction to him, tliat Jesus came down
and stood in the plain. Further, the sermon in Luke contains but
a fourth part of that in Matthew, while it lias some elements pecu-
liarly its own.

To avoid tlie unpleasant admission that one of two inspired
evangelists must be in error,-wliicli is inevitable if in relation to
tlic same discourse one of them makes Jesus deliver it on tlie moun-
tain, tlie other in tlic plain; the one sitting, the other standing; the
one earlier, the other later; if either tlie one has made important
omissions, or tlie other as important additions ;-the ancient har-
monists pronounced tlicse discourses to be distinct,* on tlie plea tliat
Jesus must frequently liave treated of tlic essential points of his
doctrine, and may therefore have repeated word for word certain im-
pressive enunciations. This may be positively denied witli respect
to long discourses, and even concise maxims will always be repro-
duced in a new guise and connexion by a gifted and inventive
teacher; to say the least, it is impossible tliat any but a very bar-
ren mind should repeat tlie same formal exordium, and tlic same
concluding illustration, on separate occasions.

Tlie identity of tlic discourses being established, the first effort
was to conciliate or to explain tlic divergencies between the two ac-
counts so as to leave their credibility unimpeaclicd. In reference to
the different designation of the locality, Paulus insists on the KTH of
Luke, wliicli lie interprets to imply tliat Jesus stood over tlie plain
and therefore on a hill.  Tholuck, more liappily, distinguishes the
level space TUTTOC; Tredn'of, from tlic plain properly so called, and re-
gards it as a less abrupt part of tlic mountain. But as one evange-
list makes Jesua ascend tlie mountain to deliver Ills discourse, while
the oilier makes him descend for tlic same purpose, these conciliators
ought to admit, witli Olshausen, tliat if Jesus taught in the plain,
according to Luke, Matthew^ lias overlooked tlie descent tliat pre-
ceded tlic discourse; or if, as Matthew says, Jesus tauglit seated
o;i tlie mountain, Luke lias forgotten to mention tliat after lie liad
descended, tlie pressure of tlic crowd induced him to reasccnd before
lie commenced his harano-uc. And without doubt each was ignorant

0                                                                                       0

of wliat lie omits, but each knew that tradition associated this dis-
course witli a sojourn of Jesus on a mountain. Matthew thought
tlic mountain a convenient elevation for one addressing a multitud-c;

Luke, on tlic contrary, imagined a descent necessary for tlic pur-
pose ; hence tlic double discrepancy, for lie who teaclics from a
mountain is sufficiently elevated over his hearers to sit, but lie wlio
teaches in a plain will naturally stand. Tlic chronological diver-

* Augustin, de conscus. ev. ii. 19.; Storr, liber den Zweck des Evang. und dor
Bricfe Joli., S. 347 ff. For further references sec Tholuck's Auslegung der Bergpredigt,
Einl.. % 1.

DISCOL'KSES OF JESUS IN THE THfiEE FIKST GOSPELS.   359

gencies, as well as the local, must be admitted, if we would abstain
from fruitless efforts at conciliation.*

The difference as to tlie length and contents of tlie discourse is
susceptible of three explanations: either the concise record of Luke
is a mere extract from tlie entire discourse wliicli Matthew gives
without abridgment; or Mattlicw lias incorporated many sayings
belonging properly to other occasions; or lastly, both tlicse causes
of variety have concurred.  lie wlio, with Tholuck, wislics to pre-
serve intact tlie fides divina, or with Paulus, tlie fides humana of
the evangelists, will prefer tlic first supposition, because to withhold
the true is more innocent than to add the false. Tlic, above theolo-
gians hold tliat tlie train of thought in tlic sermon on tlie mount as
s;iven by Mattliew, is closely consecutive, and that this is a proof
of its original unity. But any compiler not totally devoid of ability,
can give a tolerable appearance of connectedness to sayings which
did not originally belong to each other; and even tlicse commenta-
tors are obliged to adinitf tliat the alleged consecutivcness extends
over no more than half tlie sermon, for from vi. 19, it is a string of
more or less isolated sentences, some of them very unlikely to have
been uttered on tlic occasion. More recent criticism has therefore
decided that tlie shorter account of Luke presents tlie discourse of
Jesus in its original form, and that Matthew lias taken tlie license
of incorporating witli tills much tliat was uttered by Jesus at various
times, so as to retain tlic general sketch-the exordium, peroration,
and essential train of thought; wliile between these compartments
he inserted many sayings more or less analogous borrowed from else-
where.:}: This view is especially supported by the fact that many
of the sentences, wliicli in Mattlicw make part of tlie sermon on tlie
mount, are in Mark and Luke dispersed through a variety of scenes.
Compelled to grant this, yet earnestly solicitous to avert from the
evangelist an imputation tliat might invalidate his claim to be con-
sidered an eye-witness, other theologians maintain tliat Mattliew did
not compile tlic discourse under tlic idea tliat it was actually spoken
on a sino-le occasion, but with tlic clearest knowledge tliat such was

0                        •                                                                      o

not tlic casc.§ It is witli justice remarked in opposition to this, that
when Mattliew represents Jesus as ascending tlie mountain before
he begins Ills discourse, and descending after its close, he obviously
makes tlicse two incidents tlic limits of a single address; and that
wlien lie speaks of tlie impression which the discourse produced on
the multitude, wliose presence lie states as the inducement to its
delivery, lie could not but intend to convey tlie idea of a continuous
harangue. || As to Luke's edition of tlie sermon, there are parts in
which the interrupted connexion betrays deficiencies, and there are

* Comp. De "ft'ette, exeg, Handbuch, 1, 1, S. 47 it'. 1, 2, S. 44.   + Tholuck, S.
24; Paulus, exeg. Handb., 1. B. S. 584.   f. Schuiz, vom Abendmalil, S. 313 f.; Sief-
fert, S. 74 ft'.; Fritzsclie, S. 301.   ^ Okhausen, bibl. Comm., 1, S. 197; Kmi, in der
Tub. Schrift, 1 834. 2. S. 33.   II Schuiz-ut sun. S. 31,-'> • S<.linr.,.1,-,.n)iiir<wr Up;tr;irrp S

360 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

additions which do not look genuine ;* it is also doubtful whether
lie assigns a more appropriate connexion to the passages in the po-
sition of wliicli lie differs from Matthew ;f and hence, as we shall
soon sec more fully, lie lias in this instance no advantage over his
predecessor.

Tlie assemblage to whom the sermon on the mount was address-
ed, might from Luke's account be supposed a narrow circle, for he
states that the clioice of tlie apostles immediately preceded the dis-
course, and that at its commencement Jesus lifted up his eyes on
his disciples, and he does not, like Matthew, note the multitude,
oy/lovf, as part of tlie audience. On tlic other hand, Matthew also
mentions that before tlie sermon the disciples gathered round Jesus
and were taught by him; and Luke represents tlie discourse as be-
ing delivered in tlie audience of'the people (vii. 1); it is therefore
evident tliat Jesus spoke to the crowd in general, but with a partic-
ular view to tlie edification of his disciples, j: We have no reason
to doubt that a real harangue of Jesus, more than ordinarily solemn
and public, was tlie foundation of the evangelical accounts before us.

Let us now proceed to an examination of particulars. In botli
editions, the sermon on the mount is opened by a series of beati-
tudes ; in Luke, however, not only are several wanting which we
find in Mattliew, but most of those common to both are in the for-
mer taken in another sense than in the latter.S The poor, TTTG)%O'I.,
are not specified as in Matthew by the addition, in spirit, ru TTVEV-
l^aT!; they are therefore not those who have a deep consciousness
of inward poverty and misery, but tlie literally poor; neither is the
liunger of the TTEIV&V-SC; (hungering) referred to T^V 6LK.aioawi]v
(righteousness); it is therefore not spiritual hunger, but bodily;

moreover, the adverb vvv, now, definitively marks out those zvho
hunger and those w/io weep, the tetvuv-eg and icXaiov-e^. Thus in
Luke tlie antithesis is not, as in Mattliew, between the present sor-
rows of pious souls, whose pure desires are yet unsatisfied, and
their satisfaction about to come; but between present suffering and
future well-being in general.|| Tills mode of contrasting the aluv
ov-og and tlie aluv y.i'k\w, the present age and the future, is else-
where observable in Luke, especially in tlie parable of the rich man;

and without here inquiring which of tlie two representations is
probably tlie original, I shall merely remark, that tills of Luke is
conceived entirely in tlie spirit of tlie Ebionites,-a spirit which has
of late been supposed discernible in Matthew.  It is a capital prin-
ciple with tlie Ebionites, as they are depicted in the Clementine
Homilies, that he wlio lias Ills portion in tlie present age, will be
destitute in tlie age to come; wliile he who renounces eartlily pos-

* Schleiermacher, uber den Lnkas, S. 89 f.   •{• Tholnck, p. 11, and my Review ot
the writings of Sien'crt and others in the Jahrbuch fur wiss. Kritik, Nov. 1834 ; now in
my Charaktci istiken und Kritiken, S. 252 ff. . { Comp. Tholuck, ut sup. 8. 23 ff.; De
Wette, exeg. Handl.uch, 1, 1, S. 49.   § Storr, uber den Zweck u. s. w., S. 348 f. Ols-

DISCOL'RSES OF JESL'.S IX •rill'; TUBEE FIKST GOSPELS.

361

sessions, thereby accumulates heavenly treasures.* The last beati-
tude relates to tliose who are persecuted for tlie sake of Jesus. Luke
in tlie parallel passage has, for tlie Son of man's sake; hence the
words for my sake in Mattliew, must be understood to refer to
Jesus solely in his character of Messiah, f

Tlie beatitudes are followed in Luke by as many woes oval, which
are wanting in Mattliew.   In thcae tlie opposition established by
the Ebionites between this world and tlie other, is yet more strongly
marked; for woe is denounced on the rich, tlie full, and the joyous,
simply as such, and tlicy are threatened with the evils corresponding
to their present advantages, under tlie new order of tilings to be in-
troduced by the Messiah; a view tliat reminds us of tlie Epistle of
James, v. 1 ff. The last woe is somewhat stiffly formed after the
model of tlic last beatitude, for it is evidently for tlie sake of tlie
contrast to tlie true prophets, so much calumniated, tliat the false
prophets are said, without any historical foundation, to have been
spoken well of by all men.   We may therefore conjecture, witli
Schleiermacher,^ tliat we are indebted for tliese maledictions to the
inventive fertility of tlie author of tlie third gospel. He added this
supplement to the beatitudes, less because, as Schleiermacher sup-
poses, lie perceived a chasm, which he knew not how to fill, than
because he judged it consistent with tlie character of tlie Messiah,
that, like Moses of old, lie sliould couple curses witli blessings. Tlie
sermon on tlie mount is regarded as tlic counterpart of tlie law, de-
livered on Mount Sinai; but tlie introduction, especially in Luke,
reminds us more of a passage in Deuteronomy, in which Moses
commands tliat on tlie entrance of tlie Israclitish people into the
promised land, one half of them sliall take their stand on Mount
Gerizim, and pronounce a manifold blessing on tlie observers of tlie
law, tlic other half on Mount Ebal, whence they were to fulminate
as manifold a curse on its transgressors. We read in Josli. vili.
33 ft", that this injunction was fiilfilled.§

With the beatitudes, Mattliew suitably connects tlie representa-
tion of tlic disciples as the salt of the earth, and the light of the
•world (v. 13 ff.) In Luke, tlie discourse on the salt is, witli a rather
different opening, introduced in another place (xiv. 34 f.), where Je-
sus admonishes his hearers to ponder the sacrifices tliat must be
made by those wlio would follow him, and rather to abstain from.
the profession of discipleship than to maintain it dishonourably; and
to this succeeds aptly enough the comparison of sucli degenerate
disciples to salt that lias lost its savour. Thus the dictum accords

* Homil. xv. 7; coinp. Credner in Winer's Zeitschrift f.wiss. Theologie, 1, S. 293 f.;

Schneckcnbiirger, uber das livangelium del- Aegyptier, § 6.   f Schneekenburger, uber
den Ursprung, S. 29. t Ut sup. S. 90. Neander agrees with him, ut sup. § The Kab-
bins also attached weight to these Mosaic blessings and curses, vid. Ligtitfoot, p 25o. As
here we have eight blessings, they held that Abraham had been blessed benedictiomhus
septem (Eaal Turini, in Gvu. xii. Lightfoot, p. 2,'iG); David, Daniel with his three com-
panions, and the Messiah, benedictlonibus sex. (Targ. Kuth. 3. ibid.) They also counted
together with tlie twenty beatitudlnes in the Psaims, as many ras in Isaiah. (Midrasch

362

THE LITE OF JESCS.

with either context, and from its aphoristical conciseness would be
likely to recur, so that it, may have been really spoken in both dis-
courses.   On the contrary, it cannot have been spoken in tlie se-
quence in wliich it is placed by Mark (ix. 50): tor tlie idea tliat
every one shall be salted with fire (in allusion to hell), lias no inter-
nal connexion with tlie comparison of tlie true disciples of Jesus to
salt, denoting tlieir superiority; tlie connexion is merely external,
resulting from tlie verbal affinity of aU^sw and <Uac,-it is the
connexion of tlie dictionary.* Tlie altered sequel wliicli Mark gives
to tlie apothegm (have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with
anotfier), might certainly be united to it without incongruity, but it
would accord equally well witli quite a different train of thought..
Tlie apothegm on tlie liglit which is not to be hidden, as tlie salt is
not to be without savour, is also wanting in tlie sermon on tlie mount
as given by Luke; who, however, omitting tlie special application
to tlie disciples, lias substantially the same doctrine in two different
places. We rind it tirst (viii. 16.) immediately after tlie ''ntcrpreta-
tion of the parable of tlie sower, where it also occurs in Mark (iv.
21). It must be admitted that there is no incoherence in associating
the shinino' of the liaht with the fuctification of the seed; still, a

0                       0                                                                                               '             '

judicious teacher will pause on tlie interpretation of a parable, and
will not disturb its effect by a hasty transition to new images. At
any rate there is no intrinsic connexion between the shining of the
inward liglit, and tlie declaration appended to it by Luke, that all
secrets sliall be made manifest.   We liave here a case which is of
frequent recurrence with tills evangelist; tliat, namely, of a variety
of isolated sayings being thrown confusedly together between two
independent discourses or narratives. Thus between tlie parable
of tlie sower and the narrative of the visit paid to Jesus by his mother
and brethren, tlie apothegm on the liglit is inserted on account of
its internal analogy with tlie parable ; then, because in this apothegm
there occurs the opposition between concealment and manifestation,
it suggested to tlie writer tlie otherwise heterogeneous discourse on
tlie revelation of all secrets; whereupon is added, quite irrelevantly
to the context, but, witli some relation to tlie parable, tlie declara-
tion, Whosoever hath, to him shall be given. In tlie second passage
on tlie manifestation of tlie liglit (xi. 33), tlie subject lias absolutely
no connexion, unless we interpolate onc,t witli that of tlie context,
which turns on tlie condemnation of the cotcmporaries of Jesus by
the Nincvitcs. The fact is, that here again, between the discourses
against tlie demand for signs and tliose at tlie Pharisee's dinner, we
have a chasm filled up witli disjointed fragments of harangues.

At v. 17 ft", follows tlie transition to tlie main subject of the ser-
mon ; the assurance of Jesus tliat lie came not to destroy tlie law
and tlie prophets, but to fulfil, &c.   Now as Jesus herein plainly

* Schneckenliurgcr, Beitrage, S. 58. Neander tries to show, very artificially, a real
n^nn^inn ^+'tlirtno-ht s- I."i7- Anm.   -T Olslmusen in loc. Tlie tme reading is indicated

MSCOL'RSES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIEST GOSPELS.   363

presupposes tliat lie is himself the Messiah, to whom was ascribed
authority to abolish a part of tlie law, tins declaration cannot prop-
erly belong to a period in which, if Matt. xvi. 13 ff. -he rightly plac-
ed, lie had not yet declared himself to be tlie Messiah. Luke (xvi.
17) inserts this declaration together witli tlie apparently contradic-
tory one, tliat tlie law and tlie prophets were in force until the com-
ing of John.   These arc two propositions tliat we cannot suppose
to have been uttcrrcd consecutively; and tlie secret of their conjunc-
tion in Luke's gospel lies in tlie word i-'o/toc, law, which happens to
occur in both.*'  It is to be observed that between tlie parable of
the steward and tliat of tlie rich man, we have another of tliose pauses
in which Luke is fond of introducing his fragments.

So little, it appears from v. 20, is it the design of Jesus to in-
culcate a disregard of tlie Mosaic law, tliat lie requires a far stricter
observance of its precepts than tlie Scribes and Pharisees, and lie
makes the latter appear in contrast to himself as tlie underminers of
the law.  Then follows a scries of Mosaic commandments, on which
Jesus comments so as to show tliat lie penetrates into tlie spirit of
tlie law, instead of cleaving to tlie mere letter, and especially dis-
cerns tlie worthlessness of the rabbinical glosses (48). This section,
in tlie order and completeness in wliicli we find it in Matthew, is
wanting in Luke's sermon on tlie mount; a decisive proof tliat tlie
latter has deficiencies.  For not only does tills chapter contain the
fundamental thought of tlie discourse as given by Mattliew, but tlie
desultory sayings wliicli Luke gives, concerning the love of enemies,
mercifulness and beneficence, only acquire a definite purpose, and
point of union in the contrast between tlie spiritual interpretation of
the law given by Jesus, and tlie carnal one given by the doctors of
the time.  Tlie words, too, with wliich Luke makes Jesua proceed
after the last woe: -But I say unto you, and those at v. 39, .And
he spake a parable unto them, have been correctly pointed out as
indicative of chasms, f As regards the isolated parallel passages,
tlie admonition to a quick reconciliation with an adversary (v. 25 f.),
is, to say the least, not so easily brought into connexion with the
foregoing matter in Luke (xii. 58.) as in Matthew.:}: It is still worse
witli tlie passage in Luke wliicli is parallel witli Matt. v. 32; this
text (relative to divorce), wliicli in Matthew is linked in the general
chain of ideas, is in Luke (xvi. 18.) thrust into one of tlie apertures
we have noticed, between tlie assurance of the perpetuity of tlie law
and tlie parable of tlie rich man.  Olshauscn tries to find a thread
of connexion between tlie passage and tlie one preceding it, by in-
terpreting adultery, fioi.^eveiv, allegorically, as faithlessness to tlie
divine law; and Schleiermacher§ attaclies it to tlie succeeding par-
able by referring it to tlie adulterous Herod: but such interpreta-
tions are altogether visionary. [| Probably tradition had apprized

* This cause is overlooked by Schleicrmacher, S. 203; conip. De Wette, in loc.
+ Schkierniacher, ut sup. S. 90. Tholuck, S. 21. t Tholuck. S. 12. 187 : De Wette. in

364 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

the evangelist tliat Jesus, after tlie foregoing declaration as to the
perpetuity of the Mosaic law, had enunciated his severe principle on
the subject of divorce, and hence lie gave it tin's position, not know-
ing more of its original connexion. In Matt. xix. 9, we find a re-
iteration of this principle on an occasion very likely to call it forth.
The exhortations to patience and submissivencss, form, in Matthew,
the spiritual interpretation of the old rule, an eye for an eye, &c.,
and are therefore a following out of the previous train of thought.
Ill Luke (vi. 29.), they are introduced witli much less precision by
the command concerning love to enemies: which command is also
decidedly better given in Matthew as tlic rectification of the precept,
T/ion shalt love thy neighbour, and hate. thine enemy (43 ff.).
Again: tlie observation that to love friends is notliing more than
bad men can do, is, in Matthew, made, in order to controvert the
traditional perversion of the Mosaic injunction to love one's neigh-
bour, into a permission to hate enemies: in Luke, the observation
follows the rule, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
&c., which in Matthew occurs farther on (vli. 12.) without any con-
nexion. On the whole, if tlie passage in Luke from vi. 2-36, be
compared with tlie corresponding one in Mattliew, there will be
found in tlie latter an orderly course of thought; in the former, con-
siderable confusion.*

Tlie warnings against Pharisaic hypocrisy (vi. 1-6) are without
a parallel in Luke; but he lias one of the model prayer, which recent
criticism lias turned not a little to the disadvantage of Matthew.
The ancient harmonists, it is true, had no hesitation in supposing
that Jesus delivered tills prayer twice,-in tlie connexion in wliicli
it is given by Mattliew as well as under tlie circumstances narrated
by Luke (xi. 1 ff.).+ But if Jesus had already in the sermon on tlic
mount given a model prayer, his disciplea would scarcely have re-
quested one afterwards, as if nothing of tlic kind had occurcd; and
it is still more improbable tliat Jesus would repeat the same formu-
lary, without any recollection tliat lie liad delivered it to these dis-
ciples long before. Hence our most recent critics liave decided tliat
Luke alone lias preserved tlie natural and true occasion on which
this prayer was communicated, and tliat like many other fragments,
it was interpolated in Mattlicw's sermon on the mount by tlie writer.^
But the vaunted naturalness of Luke's representation, I, for one,
cannot discover. Apart from the improbability, admitted even by
the above critics, that tlie disciples of Jesus sliould have remained
without any direction to pray until tlie last journey, in which Luke
places the scene; it is anything but natural tliat Jesus should ab-
stain from giving his disciples the exemplar which was in his mind
until they souglit for it, and tliat tlien lie should forthwith fall intc
prayer. He had, doubtless, often prayed in their circle from the

* De Wette, exeg. Handb.. 1, 1, 8. 48.   + Orig. de. orat. xviii. and Hess, Gesch.
.Tesu. 2. S. 48 f. - t Schleiermacher ut sup. S. 173; Ulshausen, 1, S. 23.";; Sieffert, S. 78

DISCOUESES OF JESUS IN THE THEEE FIEST GOSPELS.   365

commencement of their intercourse ; and if so, their request was su-
perfluous, and must, as in John xiv. 9, have produced only an ad-
monition to recollect what they had long seen and Iicard in his so-
ciety. The account of Luke seems to have been framed on mere
conjecture; it was known that the above prayer proceeded from Je-
sus, and tlie further question as to the motive for its communication,
received the gratuitous answer: without doubt his disciples had
asked him for such an exemplar. Without, therefore, maintaining
tliat Matthew lias preserved to us the connexion in which tin's prayer
was originally uttered by Jesus, we are not tlie less in doubt whether
it has a more accurate position in Luke.* With regard to the ele-
ments of the prayer, it is impossible to deny wliat Wetstein says:

tota hcec oratio ex formulas IIebrcEorum concinnata est ,'f but
Fritzsche's observation is also just, tliat desires of so general a nature
might be uttered in tlie prayers of various persons, even in similar
phraseology, without any other cause than tlie broad uniformity of
human feeling, j: We may add that the selection and allocation of
the petitions in tlie prayer arc entirely original, and bear tlie im-
press of tliat religious consciousness which Jesus possessed and
sought to impart to his followers.§ Mattliew inserts after tlie con-
clusion of tlie prayer two propositions, which are properly the corol-
lary of tlie third petition, but wliicli seem inaptly placed, not only
because they are severed by the concluding petition from the pas-
sage to which they have reference, but because they liave no point
of coincidence with tlie succeeding censures and admonitions which
turn on tlie hypocrisy of the Pharisaic fasts. Mark, however, has
still more infelicitously appended these propositions to the discourse
of Jesus on the efficacy of believing prayer (xi. 25).[|

At vi. 19, tlie thread of strict connexion is broken, according to
the admission of Paulus, and so far all expositors are bound to
agree with him. But his position, that notwithstanding the admitted
lack of coherence in tlie succeeding collection of sentences, Jesus
spoke them consecutively, is not equally tenable; on the contrary,
our more recent critics have all the probabilities on their side when
they suppose, tliat in this latter half of the sermon on the mount
Matthew has incorporated a variety of sayings uttered by Jesus on
different occasions. First stands the apothegm on earthly and
heavenly treasures (19-21), which Luke, witli more apparent cor-
rectness, inserts in a discourse of Jesus, tlie entire drift of wliich is
to warn Ills adherents against earthly cares (xii. 33 f.).  It is other-
wise witli tlie next sentence, on tlie eye being tlie liglit of tlie body.
Luke annexes this to the apothegm already mentioned on tlie light
that is to be exhibited ; now as the liglit, /Lvywc, placed on a
candlestick, denotes something quite distinct from wliat is intended
by the comparison of tlie eye to a light, \v\vo^, tlie only reason for

* Comp. De Wette, exeg. IIandb. 1, 1, S. CO. 1, 2, S. 63.   \ •&. T. 1, 823. The
parallels may be seen in Wetstein and Lightfoot. t, Comm. in Matth. D. 265. i fomn-

366 THE LIFE OP JESUS.

combining tlie two apothegms lies in the bare word /lr,y»'o<r: a rule
of association which belongs properly to the dictionary, and which,
beyond it, is worse than none. Then follows, also without any
apparent connexion, the apothegm on tlie two masters, appended
by Luke to tlie parable of tlie steward, witli which it liappens to
have tlie word 3[ammon, [la^wac;, in common. Next comes, in
Matthew v. 2o-34, a dissuasion from earthly solicitude, on the
ground tliat natural objects nourish and are sustained witliout anx-
iety on their part; in Luke, thLi doctrine ia consistently united with
tlie parable (found only in tlie third gospel) of tlie man who, in the
midst of amassing earthly treasures, is summoned away by dcatli
(xii. 22 ff.).* The warning not to be blind to our own faults while
we arc sharp-sighted and severe towards those of others (vii. 1-5),
would, if we rejected tlie passage from v. 19, ofcliap. vi. to tlie end,
form a suitable continuation to tlie previous admonition against
Pharisaic sanctimoniousness (vi. 16-18), and nii^'ht, therefore,
have belonged to the original bodv of tlie discourse.f Tins is the
more probable because Luke lias the same warning in his sermon
on tlie mount (37 f. 41 f.), where it liappens to assort very well
with tlie preceding exhortation to mercifulness; but at v. 39 and
40, and part of 38, it is interrupted by subjects altogether irrelevant.
Tlie text, Witti u'/tat measure ye mete, &c., is very inappropriately
interposed by Mark (iv. 24), in a passage similar in kind to one of
Luke's intermediate miscellanies.  V. 6, in Matthew, is equally
destitute of connexion and parallel; but tlie succeeding assurances
and arguments as to the efficacy of prayer (v. 7-11), arc found in
Luke xi. 9, very fitly associated witli another parable peculiar to
tliat evangelist: tliat of the friend awaked at midnight. The apo-
thegm, What ye would that men should do unto you, &c., is
quite isolated in Matthew ; in Luke, it lias only an imperfect con-
nexion.^ The following passage (v. 13 f.) on tlie straight gate, o~evff
T"^7?, is introJnced in Luke (xiii. 23.) by tlie question, addressed to
Jesus : Are there few that be saved/ d 6/lt'yoi 01 oo^opEvcn ; which
seems likely enough to have been. conceived by one wlio knew tliat
Jesus liad uttered such a saying as tlie above, but was at a losa for
an occasion tliat might prompt tlie idea; moreover, the image is far
less completely carried out in Luke than in Matthew, and is blended
witli parabolical elcmcnts.§ Tlie apothegm on tlie tree being known
Ly its fruits (v. 16-20), appears in Luke (vi. 43 ft'.), and even in
Mattlicw, farther on (xii. 33 ft'.), to have a general explication but
in Matthew's sermon on tlie mount, it lias a special relation to the
•false prophets; in Luke, it is in the last degree misplaced. The
denunciation of those, wlio say to Jesus, .Lord, Lord, but wlio, on
account of their evil deeds will be rejected by him at tlie day of

* From vi. 19 to tlie end of the chapter, even Neander finds no orderly association,
and conjectures tliat tlie editor of lha Greek Gospel of Matthew was tlie compiler of this
latter half of the discourse (p. lU!), note). \ Neander, ut sup.; Do Wette, in loc. t De

DISCOUESES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIEST GOSPELS.   367

judgment (21-23), decidedly presupposes the Messiahship of Jesus,
and cannot, therefore, have well belonged to so early a period as
that of tlie sermon on tlie mount; Iience it is more appropriately
placed by Luke (xiii. 25 ff.). The peroration of tlie discourse is,
as we have mentioned, common to both evangelists.

The foregoing comparison sliows us tliat the discourses of Jesus,
like fragments of granite, could not be dissolved by the flood of
oral tradition; but they were not seldom torn from their natural
connexion, floated away from their original situation, and deposited
in places to wliicli tlicy did not properly belong. Relative to this
effect, there is this distinction between the three first evangelists;

Mattlicw, like an able compiler, though far from being sufficiently
informed to give each relic in its original connexion, lias yet for tlie
most part succeeded in judiciously associating analogous materials;

while the two other evangelists have left many small fragments just
where chance threw them, in the intervals between longer discourses.
Luke lias laboured in some instances to combine tliese fragments
artificially, but lie could not thus compensate for tlie absence of
natural connexion.

§ 77. INSTOrCTIOXS TO THE TWELVE--LAMENTATIONS OVER THE
GALILEAN CITIES--JOY OVEE THE CALLING OF THE SIMPLE.

THE first gospel (x.) reports another long discourse as having
been delivered by Jesus, on tlie occasion of his sending out tlie
twelve to preach tlie kingdom of heaven. Part of this discourse is
peculiar to the first gospel; tliat portion of it which is common to
tlie two other synoptists is only partially assigned by them to tlie
same occasion, Luke introducing its substance in connexion with
the mission of tlie seventy (x. 2 ft".), and in a subsequent con-
versation with the disciples (xii. 2 ff.).  Some portion of the dis-
course is also found repeated both in Matthew and tlie other
evangelists, in tlie prophetic description given by Jesus of his
second advent.

In this instance again, wliile the older harmonists have no hesi-
tation in supposing a repetition of the same discourse,* our more
recent critics are of opinion tliat Luke only has the true occasions
and tlie original arrangement of tlie materials, and tliat Matthew-
has assembled them according to his own discrction.t Those ex-
positors wlio arc apologetically inclined, maintain that Mattliew was
not only conscious of here associating sayings uttered at various
times, but presumed tliat this 'vould be obvious to his readers.^:

On the other hand, it is justly observed tliat the manner in which
tlie discourse is introduced by tlie words: These twelve Jesus sent
forth, and commanded them (v. 5); and closed by tlie words:

* E. g. IIrss, Gcsch. Jesu, 1, S. 54.").   •[- Sehuiz, ut sup. S. .'508, 314 ; Siefiert, S.
80 ff.   f Olshau-en, in loc. Tlie latter bold assertion in Kern, uber den L'rsprung dcs

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

368

•when Jeszis made an end of commanding Ids twelve disciples, &c.
(xi. 1.); proves clearly enough that it was the intention of the
evangelist to give his compilation the character of a continuous

harangue.*

Much that is peculiar to Matthew in this discourse, appears to

be merely an amplification on thoughts which arc also found in tlie
corresponding passages of the two other synoptists; hut there are
two particulars in the opening of the instructions as detailed by the
former, which differ specifically from anything presented by his fel-
low evangelists. These are the limitation of the agency of the dis-
ciples to the Jews (v. 5, 6), and the commission (associated with
that to announce the kingdom of heaven and heal tlic sick, of which
Luke also speaks, ix. 2,) to raise the dead: a surprising commission,
since we know of no instances previous to tlie departure of Jesus, in
which tlie apostles raised the dead; and to suppose such when they
arc not narrated, after tlie example of Olshausen, is an expedient to

whicli few will be inclined.

All that tlie synoptists have strictly in common in ihe instruc-
tions to tlie twelve, are tlie rules for their external conduct; how
tlicy were to journey, and how to behave under a variety of circum-
stances (Matt. v. 9-11, 14; Mark vi. 8-11; Luke ix. 3-5). Here,
however, we find a discrepancy; according to Mattliew and Luke,
Jesus forbids the disciples to take witli them, not only gold, a scrip,
and tlie like, but even shoes, vroSi'ya-a, and a, staff, pd[36ov-, accord-
ing to Mark, on the contrary, he merely forbids their taking more
tlian a staff and sandals, sl ^ pd^Sov povov and aavSd'Ma. This
discrepancy is most easily accounted for by the admission, that tra-
dition only preserved a. reminiscence of Jesus having signified the
simplicity of the apostolic equipment by the mention of the staif and
shoes, and that hence one of the evangelists understood that Jesus
had interdicted all travelling requisites except tlicse; tlic other, that
these also were included in his prohibition. It was consistent with
Mark's love of the picturesque to imagine a wandering apostle fur-
nished with a staff, and therefore to give the preference to the for-
mer view.

It is on the occasion of the mission of tlie seventy, tliat Luke

(x. 2) puts into tlie mouth of Jesus the words which Matthew gives
(ix. 37 f.) as the motive for sending forth the twelve, namely, the
apothegm, The. harvest truly is ready, but the labourers are few;

also tlie declaration that tlie labourer is worthy of hi? liire (v. 7.
comp. Matt. x. 10); tlie discourse on tlic apostolic salutation and
its effect (Matt. v. 12 f. Luke v. 5 f.); tlie denunciation of those who
should reject the apostles and their message (Matt. v. 15; Luke v.
12); and finally, the words, Behold, I send you forth as lambs,
&c. (Matt. v. 16 ; Luke. v. 3.) Tlie sequence of tliese propositions
is about equally natural in botli cases. Their completeness is alter-
nately greater in tlie one tlian in the other; but Matthew's additions

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIRST GOSPELS.   369

generally turn on essentials, as in v. 16: those of Luke on externals,
as in v. 7, 8, and in v. 4, where tliere is the singular injunction to
salute no man by the way, which might appear an unhistorical ex-
aggeration of tlie urgency of the apostolic errand, did we not know
that tlie Jewisli greetings of tliat period were not a little ceremoni-
ous.'* Sieffcrt observes tliat tlie instructions which Jesus gave-ac-
cording to Matthew, to the twelve, according to Luke, to the sev-
enty-might, so far as tlieir tenor is concerned, have been imparted
with equal fitness on either occasion; but I doubt this, for it seems
to me improbable tliat Jesus should, as Luke states, dismiss his
more confidential disciples witli scanty rules for tlieir outward con-
duct, and tliat to tlie seventy lie should make communications of
much greater moment and pathos, f Tlie above critic at length de-
cides in favour of Luke, wliose narrative appears to him more pre-
cise, because it distinguishes tlie seventy from the twelve. We

'                                                       0                                                      */

have already discussed this point, and. have found that a comparison
is rather to tlie advantage of Matthew. Tlie blessing pronounced on
him wlio sliould give even a cup of cold water to tlie disciples of
Jesus (v. 42), is at least more judiciously inserted by Mattliew as
the conclusion of tlie discourse of instructions, than in tlic endless
confusion of the latter part of Mark ix. (v. 41), where ear, (tf), and
os-ttv, {ic/iosoever), seem to form tlie only tie between the successive
propositions.

The case is otherwise when we regard those portions of tlie dis-
course which Luke places in his twelfth chapter, and even later, and
which in Matthew are distinguishable as a second part of the same
discourse.  Such arc tlie directions to the apostles as to tlieir con-
duct before tribunals (Matt. x. 19 f.; Luke xii. 11); the exhortation
not to fear tliose wlio can only kill the body (Matt. v. 28 ; Luke v.
4 f.); the warning against tlic denial of Jesus (Matt. v. 32 f.; Luke
v. 8 f.); tlie discourse on tlie general disunion of wliicli lie would
be the cause (Matt. v. 34 ff. ; Luke v. 51 ff.); a passage to which
Matthew, prompted apparently by tlie enumeration of tlic members
of a family, attaches tlie declaration of Jesus that these arc not to
be valued above him, tliat his cross must be taken, &c., winch lie
partly repeats on a subsequent occasion, and in a more suitable con-
nexion (xvi. 24 f.); further, predictions wliicli recur in tlie discourse
on tlic Mount of Olives, relative to the universal persecution of the
disciples of Jesus (v. 17 f. 22. cornp. xxiv. 9, 13); tlic saying whicli
Luke inserts in the sermon on the mount (vi. 40), and which also
appears in John (xv. 20), tliat tlie disciple has no claim to a better
lot tlian his master (v. 24 f.); lastly, tlie direction, which is peculiar
to tlic discourse in Mattliew, to flee from one city to another, witli
tlie accompanying consolation (v. 23).  These commands and ex-
hortations have been justly pronounced by criticsf to be unsuitable
to tlie first mission of the twelve, wliicli, like tlic alleged mission of

* Vid. De Wette, Archaol. § 2(i.'>, and in loc.   ^ Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb.

370 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

the seventy, had no other than happy result? (Luke ix. 10; x. 17);

they presuppose the troublous circumstances which supervened after
tlie deatli of Jesus, or perhaps in the latter period of his life. Ac-
cording to this, Luke is more correct tlian Matthew in assigning
tliesc discourses to the last journey of Jesus ;* unless, indeed, such
descriptions of the subsequent fate of the apostles and other adhe-
rents of Jesus were produced ex eventu, after his death, and put into
his mouth in the form of prophecies ; a conjecture which is strongly
suggested by the words, He who taJceth not up his cross, &c.
(v.'38.).t

The next long discourse of Jesus in Matthew (chap. xi.) we have
already considered, so far as it relates to the Baptist. From v. 20-
24, there follow complaints and threatcnings against tlie Galilean
cities, in wliicli most of his mighty works were done, and which,
nevertheless, believed not. Our modern critics are perhaps right in
their opinion that these apostrophes are less suitable to the period
of liis Galilean ministry, in wliicli Matthew places them, tlian to
that in wliicli they are introduced by Luke (x. 13 ft'.); namely, wlien
Jesus had left Gablee, and was on his way to Judea and Jerusalem,
witli a view to liis final experiment, j: But a consideration of the
immediate context seems to reserve the probability. In Matthew,
the description of the ungracious reception which Jesus and John
had alike met witli, leads very naturally to tlie accusations against
tliose places which liad been the chief theatres of the ministry of the
former; but it is difficult to suppose, according to Luke, that Jesus
would speak of liis past sad experience to tlie seventy, wliose minds
must have been entirely directed to tlie future, unless v,'c conceive
that he chose a subject so little adapted to the exigencies of those
whom he was addressing, in order to unite tlie threatened judgment
on the Galilean cities, with that which lie had just denounced against
the cities tliat should reject liis messengers. But it is more likely
that this association proceeded solely from tlie writer, who, by tlie
comparison of a city that should prove rciractorv to tlie disciples of
Jesus, to Sodom, was reminded of the analogous comparison to Tyre
and Sidon, of places that had been disobedient to Jesus himself,
without perceiving the incongruity of the one with the circumstances
which liad dictated tlie othcr.S

The joy, ayaU^aan;, expressed by Jesus (v, 25-27) on account
of the insiglit afforded to babes, vrfn'wiq, is but loosely attached by
Matthew to the preceding maledictions. As it supposes a change
in the mental frame of Jesus, induced by pleasing circumstanced,
Luke (x. 17. 21 ff.) would have all the probabilities on his side, in
making the return of tlie seventy with satisfactory tidings tlie cause

* The satisfactory connexion which modern criticism fin'i
of Luke, I am as little alilc to discover as Tholuck, Ausk'^un;

who has strikingly exposed the partiality of Schleiermachef i
Matthew,   f VL1. Us Wette, in loc.   t Schleiermacln'r, i,
Schneckenliurgcr, lUier dun Ursprung u. a. f, S. 32 f. § Cr'ii

' tlirrtiiH'hoiit the 12th chap.
; di.r Kergpredigt, S. 13 f..
r i.like, to the prejudice of
,.r ilen Lukas, S. 1(;'J f. ;

i,. l)e Wette, exeg. Handb.

DISCOUESES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIKST GOSPELS.   371

of the above expression; were it not that the appointment of tlie
seventy, and consequently their return, are altogether problemati-
cal ; besides it is possible to refer tlie passage in question to tlie
return of tlie twelve from their mission. Matthew connects with
this rejoicing of Jesus liis invitation to tlie vxary and heavy laden
(v. 28-30).  This is wanting in Luke, who, instead, makes Jesus
turn to liis disciples privately, and pronounce them blessed in being
privileged to see and hear tilings which many prophets and kings
yearned after in vain (23 f.); an observation wliicli does not so spe-
cifically agree with the preceding train of thought, as the context
assigned to it by Matthew, and which is moreover inserted by the
latter evangelist in a connexion (xiii. 16 f.): that may be advan-
tageously confronted with that of Luke.

§ 78. THE PARABLES.

ACCORDING to Matthew (cliap. xiii.), Jesus delivered seven para-
bles, all relating to the Raai^eia r&v ovpav&v. Modern criticism,
however, has doubted whether Jesus really uttered so many of these
symbolical discourses on one occasion.* The parable, it lias been
observed, is a kind of problem, to be solved by the reflection of the
hearer; liencc after every parable a pause is requisite, if it be tlie
object of tlie teacher to convey real instruction, and not to distract
by a multiplicity of ill-understood images.f It will, at least, be ad-
mitted, witli Neandcr, that parables on tlie same or closely-related
subjects can only be spoken consecutively, wlien, under manifold
forms, and from various points of view, they lead to the same result.:):

Among the seven parables in question, tliose of tlie mustard-seed
and tlie leaven have a common fundamental idea, differently shad-
owed forth-tlie gradual growth and ultimate prevalence of tlie king-
dom of God: tliose of tlie net and the tares represent tlie mingling
of the good witli the bad in tlie kingdom of God; tliose of the treas-
ure and tlie pearl inculcate tlie inestimable and all-indemnifying
value of tlie kingdom of God; and tlie parable'of tlie sower depicts
the unequal susceptibility of men to the preaching of the kingdom
of God.  Thus there arc no less than four separate fundamental
ideas involved in tills collection of parables-ideas wliicli are indeed
connected by their general relation to tlie kingdom of God, but
which present tills object under aspects so widely different, tliat for
their thorough comprehension a pause after eacli was indispensable.
Hence, it lias been concluded, Jesus would not. merit tlie praise of
being a judicious teacher, if as Mattliew represents, lie liad spoken
all tlie above parables in rapid succession.§ If we suppose in this
instance, again, an assemblage of discourses similar in kind, but
delivered on different occasions, we are anew led to tlie discussion

• Splin1» r.lir

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

372

as to whether Matthew was aware of the latter circumstance, or
whether lie believed that lie was recording a continuous harangue.
The introductory form, And fie spake many things to them m para-
bles, (v. 3.): aal i^d/^aev av-ol<; Tro/l/la KV TapafSo^al^, and tlic con-
cluding one, vihen Jesus had finished these parables (v. 53): 5re
ETv^eaEv b 'ITJOOVC; Tag TrapaftoA.iK; ~av-ac, seem to be a clear proof that
lie did not present tlie intermediate matter as a compilation. Mark,
indeed, narrates (iv. 10), that at the close of the first parable, the
disciples being again, Ka-af.iovac;, in private, with Jesus, asked him
for its interpretation; and hence it lias been contended* that there
was an interruption of tlic discourse at this point; but tills cannot
serve to explain tlie account of Matthew, for lie represents tlie re-
quest of tlic disciples as being preferred on the spot, witliout any
previous retirement from tlie crowd; thus proving that lie did not
suppose such an interruption. Tlie concluding form wliicli Mattliew
inserts after tlie fourth parable (v. 34 f.), might, witli better reason,
be adduced as intimating an interruption, for lie there comprises all
the foregoing parables in one address by tlie words, All t/tcse i/iings
spake Jesus in. parables, c&c., rav-a navro, KAa^rjasv b 'ITJOOVC; iv
TTapa0oXal(; n. r. /I., and makes the pause still more complete by tlie
application of an Old Testament prophecy; moreover, Jesus is here
said (36) to change his locality, to dismiss tlie multitude to whom
lie liad hitherto been speaking on tlic shore of tlie Galilcan sea, and
enter the house, eic; T''I{V olniav, where lie gives three new parables,
in addition to tlic interpretation which his disciples had solicited of
the second.  But tliat tlie delivery of tlie last three parables was
separated from that of tlic preceding ones bv a change of place, and
consequently by a short interval of time, very little alters tlio state
of tlic case. For it is highly improbable that Jesus would witliout
intermission tax tlie memory of tlic populace, wliose minds it was
so easy to ovcrburthen, -with four parables, two of wliicli were highly
significant; and tliat lie sliould forthwith overwhelm Ills disciples,
whose power of comprehension lie had been obliged to aid in the
application of tlie first two parables, with three new ones, instead
of ascertaining if they were capable of independently expounding
the. third and fourth. Further, we have only to look more closely
at Matthew's narrative, in order to observe, tliat lie lias fallen quite
involuntarily on the interruption at v. 34 ff. If it were his inten-
tion to communicate a series of parables, witli tlie explanations tliat
Jesus privately gave to his disciples of the two wliicli were most
important, and were therefore to be placed at tlic head of tlic series,
there were only three methods on wliicli lie could proceed.  First,
he might make Jesus, immediately after tlie enunciation of a parable,
give its interpretation to his disciples in tlic presence of tlic multi-
tude, as lie actually does in tlie case of tlie first parable (10-23). But
tlic representation is beset witli tlie difficulty of conceiving how Je-
sus, surrounded by a crowd, wliose expectation was on tlie stretch,

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIRST GOSPELS.   373

could find leisure for a conversation aside with his disciples.* This
inconvenience Mark perceived, and therefore chose the second re-
source tliat was open; to him-that of making Jesus with his dis-
ciples withdraw after the first parable into the house, and there
deliver its interpretation. But such a proceeding would be too great
a hindrance to one wlio proposed publicly to deliver several parables
one after the other: for if Jesus returned to tlie house immediately
after tlie first parable, he liad left tlic scene in which tlie succeeding
ones could be conveniently imparted to the people.  Consequently,
tlie narrator in tlie first gospel cannot, with respect to tlie interpre-
tation of tlie second parable, either repeat his first plan, or resort
to the second; lie therefore adopts a third, and proceeding uninter-
ruptedly through two further parables, it is only at their close tliat
lie conducts Jesus to the liousc, and tliere makes liiin impart the
arrear of interpretation.  Herewith there arose in tlic mind of tlie
narrator a sort of rivalry between tlie parables wliicli lie liad yet in
reserve, and the interpretation, the arrear of wliicli embarrassed
him; as soon as tlie former w^rc absent from Ills recollection, tlie
latter would be present with its inevitably associated form of con-
clusion and return homeward; and when any remaining parables
recurred to him, he was obliged to make tliem tlic sequel of the inter-
pretation. Thus it betel with tlie three last parables in Matthew's
narration; so tliat he was reduced almost against his will to make
the disciples their sole participants, tliougli it docs not appear to
have been the custom of Jesus tlius to clotlie his private instruc-
tions ; and Mark (v. 33 f.) plainly supposes tlic parables which fol-
low tlie intcroi-etation of tlie second, to be also addressed to the
people.f

Mark, wlio (iv. 1) depicts tlie same scene by tlie sea-side, as
Mattliew, lias in connexion with it only three parables, of which the
first and tliird correspond to the first and third of Matthew, but tlie
middle one is commonly deemed peculiar to Mark.i: Mattliew lias
in its place tlie parable wherein tlie kingdom of lieavcn is likened to
a man wlio sowed good seed in Ills field; but while men slept, tlie
enemy came and sowed tares among it, which grew up witli tlie
wlieat. Tlic servants know not from whence tlic tares come, and
propose to root them up ; but tlie master commands them to let both
grow together until tlie harvest, when it will be time enough to sepa-
rate them. In Mark, Jesus compares tlie kingdom of heaven to a
man who casts seed into the ground, and wliile lie sleeps and rises
again, tlie seed passes, lie knows not how, from one stage of devel-
opment to another: and when it is ripe, he puts in the sic/do, be-
cause the harvest is co-ine. In this parable there is wanting wliat
constitutes tlic dominant idea in tliat of Mattliew, tlie tares, sown
by the enemy; but as, nevertheless, the other ideas, of sowing,

•* Schleicrmacher, S. 120. t Fritzschc, Comm. inMarc. S. 120, 128, 131; DC Wette,
inloc. ^ Comp. Saumer, uber die Qucllen des Markus, S. 74 , Frifczscho, ufc sup.; DeWcttc,

374 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

sleeping, growing one knows not how, and harvest, wliolly corre-
spond, it may Le questioned whether Mark does not here merely
give tlie same parable in a different version, which lie preferred to
that of Matthew, because it seemed more intermediate between the
first parable of the sower, and tlic third of tlie mustard-seed.

Luke, also, lias only lliree of the seven parables given in Matt.
xiii.: namely, tliose of the sower, the mustard-seed, and tlie leaven;

so that tlie parables of tlie buried treasure, tlie pearl, and tlie net,
as also that of tlic tares in tlie field, arc peculiar to Mattliew. Tlie
parable of tlie sower is placed by Luke (viii. 4 ff.) somewhat earlier,
and in other circumstances, than by Mattliew, and apart from the
two other parables wliicli lie lias in common witli the first evange-
list's series. These lie introduces later, xiii. 18-21; a position
which recent critics unanimously acknowledge as tlie correct one.*
But this decision is one of tlie most remarkable to wliicli tlie criti-
cism of tlie present age lias been led by its partiality to Luke. For
if we examine the vaunted connectedness of tills evangelist's pas-
sages, we find, tliat Jesus, having licaled a woman bowed down by
a spirit of infirmity, silences tlic punctilious ruler of tlie synagogue
by tlie argument about the ox and ass, after which it is added (v.
17), And, when he had said these things, all his adversaries were
as/uiined; and all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things
that vere done by him. iSurely so complete and marked a form of
conclusion is intended to wind up tlie previous narrative, and one
cannot conceive that tlic sequel went forward in the same scene; on
tlic contrary, tlic phrases, then said he, and again lie said, by wliicli
tlie parables arc connected, indicate tliat tlie writer liad no longer
any knowledge of tlic occasion on wliicli Jesus uttered them, and
hence inserted them at random in tills indeterminate manner, far
less judiciously than Mattliew, wlio at least was careful to associate
them witli analogous matemls.f

We proceed to notice tlic other evangelical parables,^ and first
among them, those which are peculiar to one evangelist. We come
foremost in Mattliew to the parable of tlie servant (xviii. 23 ff.) who,
although Ills lord had forgiven him a debt of ten tliousand talents,
liad no mercy on Ins fellow-servant wlio owed him a hundred; tol-
erably well introduced by an exhortation to placability (v. 15), and
tlic question of Peter, How aft shall my brother sin against me,
and/forgive him? Likewise peculiar to Matthew is tlie parable
of tlic labourers in tlie vineyard (xx. 1 ff.), wliicli suitably enough
forms a counterpoise to tlic foregoing promise of a ricli recompense
to the disciples. Of the sentences wliicli Mattliew appends to this
parable (v. 16), tlie first, So the last shall he first, and the first last,
by wliicli lie liad also prefaced it (xix. 30), is tlie only one with

* Srhleiermaclier, ut sup. S. 192; Olsliausei], 1, S. 431; Schneckenburgcr, nt sup. &
33. •)• Coinp Ue Wettp, excg. llaiidb. 1, 2, S. 73 f. t Analogies to these parables and
apothegms, arc given out of the rabbinical literature bv Wetstein, I.iglitloot, anil Si.holt

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIRST GOSPELS.

375

which it has any internal connexion; the other, for many are
called, tutfezo chosen, rather gives the moral of tlie parable of the
royal feast and the wedding garment, in connexion witli which Mat-
tliew actually repeats it (xxii. 14). It -wa.3 well adapted, however,
even torn from this connexion, to circulate as an independent apo-
thegm, and as it appeared fitting to the evangelist to annex one or
more short sentences to the end of a parable, lie might be induced,
by some superficial similarity to the one already given, to place them
in companionship. Farther, the parable of tlie two sons sent into
tlie vineyard, is also peculiar to Mattliew (xxi. 28 ft'.), and is not ill-
placed in connexion witli the foregoing questions and retorts between
Jesus and the Pharisees; its anti-Pharisaic significance is also well
brought out by tlic sequel (31 f.).

Among the parables which are peculiar to Luke, tliat of tlie two
debtors (vli, 41 ff.); tliat of tlic good Samaritan (x. 30 ff.); tliat of
tlie man whose accumulation of earthly treasure is interrupted by
death (xii. KJ ff. coiup. Wis. xi. 17 ff.); and also tlie two which
figure the efficacy of importunate prayer (xi. 5 ff. xviil. 2 ff.); have
a definite, clear signification, and witli the exception of tlie last,
which is introduced abruptly, a tolerably consistent connexion. We
may learn from tlie two last parables, tliat it is often necessary en-
tirely to abstract particular features from the parables of Jesus, see-
ing that in one ot them God is represented by a lukewarm friend,
in the oilier by an unjust nidge. To tlie latter is amicxcd the para-
ble of the Pharisee and Publican (9-14), of wliicli only Sclileier-
machcr, on tlie strength of a connexion, fabricated by himself be-
tween it and the foregoing, can deny tlic antipharisalc tendency.*
The parables of tlie lost sheep, tlie piece of silver, and tlie prodigal
son (Luke xv. 3-32), have tlic same direction. Mattliew also lias
the first of these (xviii. 12 ff.), but in a different connexion, which
determines its import somewhat differently, and without doubt, as
will presently be shown, less correctly. It is easy to imagine that
tliese three parables were spoken in immediate succession, because
tlie second is merely a variation of tlie first, and tlie third is an am-
plification and elucidation of them both. Whether, according to tlie
opinion of modern criticism, tlic two succeeding parables also belong
with tlic above to one continuous discourse,! must be determined
by a closer examination of their contents, which are in themselves
noteworthy.

Tlie parable of tlie unjust steward, notoriously the crux inter-
pretum, is yet without any intrinsic difficulty. If we read to tlie
end of tlic parable, including tlie moral (v. 9), we gatlier the simple
result, tliat tlie man who without precisely using unjust means to
obtain riches, is yet in tlie siglit of God an iii'prcjitable servant,
6ov^o(; d^ps'io^ (Luke xvii. 10), and, in tlie employment of tlie gifts
intrusted to him by God, a steward of injustice, olnovo^ T'/JC acWac,
may best atone for this pervading unfaithfulness by lenity and bene-

376 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

ficence towards his fellow-men, and may by their intervention procure
a place in heaven.  It is true tliat tlie beneficence of the fictitious
steward is a fraud; but we must abstract this particular, as, in the
case of two previous parables, we have to abstract tlie lukewarmness
of tlie friend, and tlie injustice of the judge: nay, tlie necessity for
sucli an abstraction is intimated in the narrative itself, for from v. 8.
we cather tliat what the steward did in a worldly spirit is, in the
application, to be understood in a more exalted sense of tlie children
of light. Certainly, if we suppose the words, lie that is faithful
in that which is least, &c. (10-12) to have been uttered in their
present connexion, it appears as if the steward were set fortli as a
model, deserving in some sense or other tlie praise of faithfulness;

and when (v. 13) it is said that no servant can servf? two masters,
tlie intended inference seems to be that this steward liad lield to the
rightful one. Hence we have expositions such as tliat of Schleier-
maclier, who under tlie master understands tlie Romans; under
tlie debtors, the Jewisli people; under tlie steward, tlie publicans,
who were generous to tlie latter at tlie expense of tlie former;

thus, in the most arbitrary manner, transforming the master into
a violent man, and justifying tlie steward.* Olshauscn carries the,
perversion of the parable to tlie extreme, for lie degrades tlie master,
wlio, by his judicial position evidently announces himself as the rep-
resentative of God, into ap^uv -ov nodflov rov-ov, the prince of this
world, while lie exalts tlie steward into the image of a man wlio
applies the riches of this world to spiritual objects. But as in the
moral (v. 9) tlie parable lias a consistent ending; and as inaccurate
association is by no means unexampled in Luke ; it is not admissible
to concede to the following verses any influence over tlie interpre-
tation of tlie parable, unless a close relation of idea can be made
manifest. Xow tlie fact is, that the very opposite, namely, the most
perplexing diversity, exists.   Moreover, it is not difficult to show
what might have seduced Luke into a false association. In the
parable there was mention of the mammon of unrighteousness,
{zajJiwag -Tig dSiitial;; tills suggested to him the saying of Jesus, tliat
he wlio proves faithful in tlie ddt/co) fia/J.wva, the unrighteous mam-
mon, as that which is least, may also have the true riches committed
to his trust. But tlie word mammon having once taken posscsion
of tlie writer'a mind, how could he avoid recollecting tlie well known
aphorism of Jesus on God and Mammon, as two incompatible masters,
and adding it (v. 13), however superfluously, to tlie preceding texts ?t

* L't sup.

\ Schncckenbnrger has decided, Beitriigc, So, V> where he refutes Olshausen's inter-
pretation of tlie parable, that this verse does not really belong to its present position, while
with respect to tlie preceding verses from v, 9, he finds it possible to hold the contrary
opinion. Do 'VVette also considers tliat v. 13 is the only one drciiledly out of place, lie
thinks it possible, by supplying an intermediate proposition, whirl] he supposes the writer
to have omitted, and which led from the prudent use of riclies to faithfulness in presc'rving
those entrusK-d to us. to give a sufficient connexion to v. 9 and 10-1^, without neces-
sarily referring the idea of faithfulness to tlie conduct of the steward. The numerous at-

DISCOUESES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIRST GOSPELS.   377

That by this addition the previous parable was placed in a thoroughly
false liglit, gave tlie writer little concern, perhaps because lie liad
not seized its real meaning, or because, in the endeavour completely
to disburtlien his evangelical meaning, lie lost all solicitude about
tlie sequence of his passages.  It ouglit, in general, to be more con-
sidered, tliat those of our evangelists wlio, according to tlie now
prevalent opinion, noted down oral traditions, must, in tlie compo-
sition of their writings have exerted their memory to an extent tliat
would repress tlie activity of reflection; consequently tlie arrange-
ment of the materials in their narratives is o-ovcrned by the associa-
tion of ideas, tlie laws of wliicli are partly dependent on external
relations; and we need not be surprised to find many passages, es-
pecially from the discourses of Jesus, ranged together for tlie sole
cause tliat they happen to have in common certain striking conso-
nant words.

If from hence we glance back on the position, tliat tlie parable
of the unjust steward must have been spoken in connexion with the
foregoing one of tlie prodigal son, we perceive tliat it rests merely
on a false interpretation.   According to Schleicrmachcr, it is the
defence of the publicans against tlie Pharisees, that forms the bond;

but there is no trace of publicans and Pharisees in the latter parable.
According to Olshauscn, tlie compassionate love of God, represented
in the foregoing parable, is placed in juxtaposition witli tlie com-
passionate love of man, represented in tlie succeeding one; but simple
beneficence is the sole idea on which the latter turns, and a parallel
between tills and tlie manner in wliicli God meets the lost with par-
don, is equally remote from the intention of the teacher and the nat-
ure of tlie subject.  Tlie remark (v. 14) tliat tlie Pharisees heard
all tliesc tilings, and, being covetous, derided Jesus, docs not neces-
sarily refer to tlie individuals mentioned xv. 2, so as to imply that
they liad listened to tlie intermediate matter as one continuous dis-
course ; and even if tliat were tlie case, it would only show tlie view
of tlie writer witli respect to tlie connectedness of tlie parables; a
view wliicli, in tlie face of the foregoing investigation, cannot pos-
sibly be binding on us.*

We have already discussed the passage from v. 15 to 18; it
consists of disconnected sayings, and to tlie last, on adultery, is an-
nexed tlie parable of tlie ricli man, in a manner which, as we have
already noticed, it is attempted in vain to show as a real connexion.
It must, however, be conceded to Schleiermachcr, that if we separate
them, tlie alternative, namely, tlie common application of tlie parable
to tlie penal justice of God, is attended witli great difficulties.t For
there is no indication throughout tlie parable, of any actions on tlie
part of the rich man and Lazarus, tliat could, according to our no-
tions, justify tlie exaltation of the one to a place in Abraham's

dislocation of the associated passages, arc only so many proofs that it is absolutely r&

quisite to a satisfactory interpretatioiii

378 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

bosom, and the condemnation of the other to torment; the guilt of the

one appears to lie in his wealth, tlie merit of the other in his poverty.
It is indeed generally supposed of the rich man, tliat lie was im-
moderate in his indulgence, and that he had treated Lazarus un-
kindly.* But tlie latter is nowhere intimated; for tlie picture of
the beggar lying at tlie door of the rich man, is not intended in tlie
light of a reproach to the latter, because lie might easily have
tendered his aid, and yet neglected to do so ; it is designed to ex-
hibit the contrast, not only between the earthly condition of tlie two
parties, but between their proximity in this life, and their wide sep-
aration in another.  So tlie other particular, tliat tlie beggar was
eager for tlie crumbs that fell from tlie rich man's table, docs not
imply tliat the rich man denied him tills pittance, or tliat lie ought
to have given him more tlian the mere crumbs; it denotes the deep
degradation of tlie earthly lot of Lazarus compared witli that of the
rich man, in opposition to their reversed position after death, when
tlie ricli man is fain to entreat for a drop of water from the hand of
Lazarus. On the supposition tliat tlie rich man liad been wanting
in compassion towards Lazarus, tlie Abraham of tlie parable could
only reply in the following manner: "Thou liadst once easy access
to Lazarus, and yet thou didst not, relieve him; how then canst thou
expect him to traverse a long distance to give tliee alleviation ?"
The sumptuous life of tlie rich man, likewise, is only depicted as a
contrast to the misery of tlie beggar ; for if lie liad been supposed
guilty of excess, Abraham must have reminded him tliat lie liad
taken too much of tlie good things of this life, not merely tliat lie
liad received Ins share of them. Equally groundless is it, on tlie
other hand, to suppose high moral excellencies in Lazarus, since
there is no intimation of such in tlie description of him, which merely
regards his outward condition,-neither are such ascribed to him by
Abraham: his sole merit is, the having received evil in this life.
Thus, in this parable tlie measure of future recompense is not the
amount of good done, or wickedness perpetrated, but of evil endured,
and fortune cnjoyed,t and tlie aptcst motto for this discourse is to
be found in the sermon on tlie mount, according to Luke's edition:

-Blessed be ye poor, for yours is the kinydom of God!  Woe. to
you tliat are, 'ricli ! for ye /lave received i/our consolation; a pas-
sage concerning which we have already remarked, tliat it accords
fully witli tlie Ebionite view of tlie world. A similar estimation of
external poverty is ascribed to Jesns by the other synoptists, in tlie
narrative of tlie rich young man, and in tlie aphorisms on tlie camel
and tlie needle's eye (Matt. xix. 16 tf.; Mark x. 17 if.; comp. Luke
xviii. 18 ff.). Whether this estimation belong to Jesus himself, or
only to tlie synoptical tradition concerning liirn, it was probably
generated by the notions of tlie Essencs.f We have hitherto con-

* Ti<l. KuiiKil, ill loc.  t Comp. De Wettc, 1, 2, S. 86 f.  t On tlie Essencs as con-
temners nf ririirs (naTafpavriTuf; irAorroi;), coiiip. Joseph, li. j. ii. viii. 3; Cnidiicr, ilber

DISCOUESES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIEST GOSPELS.   379

sidcicd the contents of tlie parable down to v. 27; from whence to
tlie conclusion tlie subject is, tlie writings of tlie Old Testament as
the adequate and only means of grace.

In conclusion, we turn to a group of parables, among which
some, as relating to tlie death and return of Christ, ought, according
to our plan, to be exccptcd from tlie present, review; but so far as
thcv arc connected with tlie rest, it is necessary to include them.
They arc tlie three parables of tlie rebellions husbandmen in tlie
vineyard (Matt. xxi. 33 •ff. parall.), of the talents or mina; (Matt.
xxv. 14 ft'.: Luke xix. 12 ff.), and tlie marringe feast (Matt. xxii.
3 ff. ; Luke xiv. 16 ff.).  Of these tlie parable of the husbandmen
in all tlie accounts, that of the talents in Matthew, and that of tlie
marriage feast in Luke, arc simple parables, unattended with diffi-
culty. -Not so tlie parable of tlie mina' in Luke, and of tlie marriage
feast in Matthew. Tliat tlie former is fundamentally tlie same witli
tliat of tiie talents in Mattliew, is undeniable, notwithstanding tlie
many divergencies. In botli are found tlie journey of a master; tlie
assembling of tlie servants to entrust them with a capital, to be put
into circulation ; after tlie return of tlie master, a reckoning in wliicli
three servants arc. signalized, two of them as active, the third as in-
active, whence tlie latter is punished, and tlie former rewarded ; and
in tlie annunciation of tills issue tlie words of tlie master are nearly
identical in tlie two statements. Tlie principal divergency is, tliat
besides tlie relation between tlie master wlio journeys into a far
country and his servants, in Luke there is a second relation between
tlie forincr and certain rebellious citizens; and accordingly, wliile in
Mattliew tlie piaster is simply designated avOpu-oc;, a man, in Luke
lie is styled av0pu-:o(; evyevt^, a nobleman, and a J-dnydo'nz is assigned
to him, the object of Ins journey being to receive, for himself a king-
dom: an object of wliicli there is no mention in Mattliew. The sub-
jects of tins personage, it is farther said, hated him, and after his de-
parture renounced their allegiance. Hence at tlie return of tlie lord,
tlie rebellious citizens, as well as tlie slothful servant, arc punished;

but in their case tlie retribution is tliat of dca.tli: the faithful ser-
vants, on tlie other liand, are not only rewarded generally by an en-
trance into tlie joy of their Lord, but royally, by the gift of a
number of cities. There are other divergencies of less moment be-
tween Luke and Mattliew; such as, tliat the number of servants is
undetermined by tlie one, and limited to ten by tlie other; tliat in
Mattliew they receive talents, in Luke mina'; in tlie one unequal
sums, in the other equal; in tlie one, they obtain unequal profits
from unequal sums by an equal expenditure of effort, and arc there-
fore equally rewarded; in the other, they obtain unequal profits from
equal sums by an unequal expenditure of effort, and arc therefore
unequally rewarded.

Supposing tills parable to have proceeded from tlie lips of Jesus
on two separate occasions, and that Mattliew and Luke are right in

"tlir'ir TOti'nt'l'+l \'<^ m.-l'nnfVo^inTi+a 1in i-t-inc-+ hn^Q /-ii-ilnr^i-o--! i+ +-H.C-+ 111 +lii^

380

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

more complex form given by Luke, and then in tlie simple one given
by Matthew ;"* since the former places it before, tlie latter after the
entrance into Jerusalem. But this would be contrary to all analogy.
The first presentation of an idea is, according to the laws of thought,
the most simple ; -with tlie second new relations may be perceived,
the subject may be viewed under various aspects, and brought into
manifold combinations. There is, therefore, a foundation for Schlcier-
machcr's opinion, that contrary to tlie arrangement in tlie Gospels,
Jesus first delivered the parable in tlie more simple form, and ampli-
fied it on a subsequent occasion.f But for our particular case tills
order is not less inconceivable than tlie other. The author of a com-
position such as a parable, especially when it exists only in his mind
and on his lips, and is not yet fixed in writing, remains the perfect
master of Ins materials even on tlicir second and more elaborate pre-
sentation ; tlie form wliicli lie had previously given to them is not
rigid and inflexible, but pliant, so tliat lie can adapt tlie original
thoughts and images to the additional ones, and thus give unity to
his production. Hence, liad he wlio gave tlie above parable tlie form
wliicli it lias in Luke, been its real author, lie would, after having
transformed the master into a king, and inserted the particulars res-
pecting the rebellious citizens, have entrusted arms to tlie servants
instead of money (comp. Luke xxii. 36.), ^ and would have made
them show tlicir fidelity rather by conflict with tlie rebels, tlian by
increasing their capital; or in general would have introduced some
relation between tlie two classes of persons in tlie parable, tlie ser-
vants and tlie citizens ; instead of wliicli, tlicy are totally uncon-
nected throughout, and form two ill-cemented divisions.§

This sliows very decisively that tlie parable was not enriclied
with tliese additional particulars by tlie imagination of its author,
but tliat it was tlius amplified by another in tlie process of trans-
mission.  Tills cannot have been effected in a legendary manner,
by tlie gradual filling up of the original sketch, or the development
of the primitive germ; for tlie idea of rebellious citizens could never
be evolved from that of servants and talents, but must have been
added from without, and therefore have previously existed as part
of an independent whole.  This amounts to tlie position tliat we
have here an example of two originally distinct parables, tlie one
treating of servants and talents, the other of rebellious citizens,
flowing together in consequence of tlicir mutually possessing the
images of a ruler's departure and return. || Tlie proof of our prop-
osition must depend on our being able easily to disentangle tlie
two parables : and tills we can effect in tlie most satisfactory man-
ner, for by extracting v. 12, 14, 15, and 27, and slightly modi-
fying them, we get in a, rather curtailed but consistent form, tlie

* Thus Kuinol, Comm. in I,uc. p. G3.">. •;• Uelier den Lukas, 239 f. Seamier agrees
•n-ith Mill, L.J. Chr. p. 188.   t 'rn13 ls a '^P^Y t0 Seander's objection, p. 191 note.
{i How Paulus, exes', llandb. 3, a, p. 76, can pronounce the more complex form of thn
narable in Luke as not only the most fully developed but the best wound up, I am at a

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THEEE FIEST GOSPELS.   381

parable of the rebellious citizens, and we then recognise the simil-
arity of its tendency with that of the rebellions husbandmen in the

vineyard.*

A similar relation subsists between the form in which the
parable of the marriage feast is given by Luke (xiv. 16 ft.), and
that in which it is given by Matthew (xxii. 2 ff".); only tliat in tins
case Luke, as in tlie other, Matthew, lias tlie merit of having
preserved tlie simple original version. On both sides, tlie particulars
of the feast, the invitation, its rejection and the consequent bidding
of other guests, testify tlie identity of the two parables; but, on tlie
other hand, tlie host who in Luke is merely a certain man, avOpu-
TTO(; -tc, is in Matthew a Jcinq, ftaoiXsv(;, whose feast is occasioned
by tlie marriage of Ills son ; tlie invited guests, wlio in Luke excuse
themselves on various picas to tlie messenger only once sent out to
them, in Mattliew refuse to come on the first invitation, and on the
second more urgent one, some go to tlicir occupations, wliile others
maltreat and kill the servants of tlie king, wlio immediately sends
forth Ills armies to destroy tliose murderers, and burn up their city.
Nothing of tills is to be found in Luke ; according to him, tlie liost
merely causes the poor and afflicted to be assembled in place of tlie
guests first invited, a particular wliicli Mattliew also appends to his
fore-mentioned incidents. Luke closes the parable with the decla-
ration of the host, tliat none of the first bidden guests shall partake
of liis supper; but Mattliew proceeds to narrate how, when tlie
house was full, and the king had assembled liis guests, one was
discovered to be witliout a wedding garment, and was forthwith
carried away into outer darkness.

Tlie maltreatment and murder of tlio king's messengers are
features in tlie narrative of Matthew wliicli at once strike us as
inconsistent-as a departure from the original design. Disregard.
of an invitation is sufficiently demonstrated by tlie rejection of it
on empty pretexts sucli as Luke mentions; the maltreatment and
even tlie murder of tlioso wlio deliver the invitation, is an exagger-
ation wliicli it is less easy to attribute to Jesus tlian to the Evan-
gelist. Tlie latter liad immediately before communicated the parable
of tlie rebellious husbandmen; hence there hovered in his recollection
tlie manner in which they were said to have used the messengers
of tlicir lord, beating one, killing and stoning others, (/la/3wTEC rovf
Sov'/.ovc; av~ov bv p,ev USeipav, bv 6e oTre/CTWav, bv de KXi,6op6XT]<Jav,\
and he was tlius led to incorporate similar particulars into the present
parable (icpa~f']aav-E(; -ovc {iov^ovq avrov v^pwav Hal d-rc/CTwav,) over-
looking tlie circumstance tliat what might have been perpetrated
with sufficient motive against servants wlio appeared witli demands

* V. 12. 'Av-Spumi; nc riyei-'w impcvi)^ H'f %upav fiaispiiv, iaReiv eavm fiaaiAeiav,
Kai VROarpe-^iu.  14. oi df •KoUTai O.VTOV fftiaovv avrov, Ka'i uTrearei'^av wpsapeiav OTrtffo
avTm, V yov-i ff or St\oficv TOVTOV paai/.cvaal n»' i/fiuc,  15. Kai b/evero cv TO mavtWdv
avTdv ^aljovra T»/V iSaiAriav, Kai sl-ire iliwrf-Qf/vat ainu rove Sov^ovc-(nal el-rsv av'o'if)

382

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

and authority to enforce them, had. in the latter case no motive
whatever. That hereupon, the king, not satisfied with excluding
them from this feast, sends out his armies to destroy them and burn
up their city, necessarily follows from the preceding incidents, liut.
appears, like them, to be the echo of a parable which presented the
relation between the master and the dependents, not in tlie milder
form of a rejected invitation, but in the more severe one of an in-
surrection ; as in the parable of the husbandmen in the. vineyard,
and tliat of the rebellious citizens, wliich we have above separated
from the parable of tlie minai. Yet more decidedly does the drift
of the last particular in Matthew's parable, that of the wedding
garment, betray that it was not originally associated with tlie rest.
For if the king had commanded that all, both bad and good, who
were to be found in the highways, should be bidden to the feast, he
could not wonder tliat they had not all wedding attire. To assume
tliat those thus suddenly summoned went home to wash, and adjust
their dress, is an arbitrary emendation of tlie text.* Little prefer-
able is the supposition that, according to oriental manners, tlie king
liad ordered a caftan to be presented to each guest, and might there-
fore justly reproach the meanest for not availing himself of the gift;t
for it is not to be proved that such a custom existed at. tlie period,:}:

and it is not admissible to presuppose it merely because the anger
of tlie king appears otherwise unfounded. But tlie addition in
question is not only out of harmony with the imagery, but with the
tendency of this parable. For while hitherto its aim had been to
exhibit the national contrast between the perversity of the Jews,
and tlie willingness of tlie gentiles: it all at once passes to the
moral one, to distinguish between tlie worthy and tlie unworthy.
Tliat after tlie Jews liad contemned tlie invitation to partake of the
kingdom of God, tlie heathens would be called into it, is one com-
plete idea, witli wliicli Luke very properly concludes his parable;

tliat he who does not prove himself worthy of the vocation by a
corresponding disposition, will be again cast out of tlie kingdom,
is anotlicr idea, which appears to demand a separate parable for its
exhibition. Here again it may be conjectured tliat tlie conclusion
of Matthew's parable is the fragment of another, which, from its
also referring to a feast, might in tradition, or in tlie memory of an
individual, be easily mingled with the former, preserved in its purity
by Luke.§ This other parable must have simply set forth, that a
king liad invited various guests to a wedding feast, with tlie tacit
condition that they should provide themselves witli a suitable dress,
and that lie delivered an individual who liad neglected this observ-
ance to his merited punishment.  Supposing our conjectures correct,

* Fritzsche, p. G5G. Tins remark serves to refute De Wette's vindication of the
above particular in his exeg. Handb. + I'aulus, exeg. Haiidb. 3, a, S. 210 ; Olshausen,
bibl. Comm. 1, S. 811.   t Vid. Fritzsche, ut sup,   if I'rum the appendix to Schnecken-

.    -,- n..!»-___._ T ..„„ .!,„> „ .„„;„,„„, ir, the ThonI 1 .itfratlirblatt. 1831. NO. 88, ha8

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THBEE FIEST GOSPELS.   383

•we liave here a still more compound parable than in the former case:

a parable in which, Istly, the narrative of the ungrateful invited
parties (Luke xiv.) forms tlie main tissue, but so tliat, 2ndly, a
thread from tlie parable of tlie rebellious husbandmen is interwoven;

while, 3rdly, a conclusion is stitclicd on, gathered apparently from
an unknown parable on the wedding garment.

This analysis gives us an insight into tlie procedure of evangeli-
cal tradition with its materials, wliich must be pregnant with results.

§ 79. MISCELLANEOUS INSTRUCTIONS AND CONTEOVEESIES
OF JESUS.

AS the discourses in Matt. xv. 1-20 have been already con-
sidered, we must pass on to xviii. 1 ff., Mark ix. 33 ff., Luke ix.
46 ff., where various discourses are connected with the exhibition
of a little child, occasioned by a contention for pre-eminence among
the disciples. Tlie admonition to become as a little child, and to
humble one's self as a little child, in Matthew forms a perfectly suit-
able comment on tlie symbolical reproof (v. 3, 4.); but the connexion
between tills and the following declaration of Jesus, tliat whosoever
receives one such little cliild in his name, receives him, is not so
obvious. For tlie child was set up to teach the disciples in what
they were to imitate it, not how they were to behave towards it, and
liow Jesus could all at once lose sight of his original object, it is
difficult to conceive. But yet more glaring is tlie irrelevance of the
declaration in Mark and Luke; for they make it follow immediately
on the exhibition of the cliild, so that, according to tills, Jesus must,
in the very act, have forgotten its object, namely, to present tlie
child to Ids ambitious disciples as worthy of imitation, not as in
want of reception.* Jesus was accustomed to say of his disciples,
that whosoever received tliem, received him, and in liirn, the Fattier
who liad sent him (Matt. x. 40 ff.; Luke x. 16; John xiii. 20). Of
children lie elsewhere says merely, tliat whosoever does not receive
the kingdom of heaven as a little cliild cannot, enter therein (Mark
x. 15. Luke xviii. 17.) This declaration would be perfectly adapted
to the occasion in question, and we may almost venture to conjecture
that 5? iav f.ifj Sk^-ai, rfjv paai.^.eiav ~wv ovpavuv we; nai.Slov, was tlie
original passage, and tliat tlie actual one is the result of its confusion
witli Matt. x. 40, 6(: eav SKETCH TraiSiov TOIOVTOV Iv enl rw oro^tm fiov.

Closely connected by tlie word d-n-ofcpitec, answering, with tlie
sentences just considered, Mark (ix. 38 f.) and Luke (ix. 49 f.) in-
troduce tlie information which John is said to give to Jesus, that

•the disciples having seen one casting out devils in tlie name of Je-
sus, without attaching himself to their society, liad forbidden liim.
Schleiermacher explains tlie connexion tlius: because Jesus had
commanded the reception of children in, his name, John was led to

384 THE LIFE OP JESL'S.

tlie confession, that he and Ills associates had hitherto been so far
from regarding the performing of an act in the name of Jesus as tlie
point of chief importance, tliat they liad interdicted tlie use of his
name to one who followed not with them.* Allowing this explana-
tion to be correct, we must believe tliat Jolm, arrested by the phrase,
in my name (which yet is not prominent in the declaration of Jesus,
and which must have been thrown still farther into tlie background,
by the sight of tlie cliild set up in the midst), drew from it tlie gen-
eral inference, tliat in all actions tlie essential point is to perform
them in the name of Jesus; and with equal rapidity, leaped to the
remote reflection, tliat tlie conduct of tlie disciples towards tlie ex-
orcist was in contradiction with this rule. But all this supposes the
facility of combination which belongs to a Schlcicrmachcr, not tlie
dulness wliicli still characterized tlie disciples. Nevertheless, tlie
above critic lias unquestionably opened on the true vein of connexion
between tlie preceding apotliegm and this d-oicpwif; of John ; lie lias
only failed to perceive tliat this connexion is not intrinsic and orig-
inal, but extrinsic and secondary. It was quite beyond tlie reach
of tlie disciples to apply tlie words in my name, by a train of de-
ductions, to an obliquely connected case in their own experience;

but, according to our previous observations, nothing could be more
consistent witli the habit of association that characterizes the writer
of the evangelical tradition in the third Gospel, whence tlie second
evangelist seems to have borrowed, than tliat he sliould be reminded
by the striking phrase, in my name, in the preceding discourse of
Jesus, of an anecdote containing tlie same expression, and should
unite the two for tlie sake of that point of external similarity alone.f

To the exhortation to receive such little children, Matthew an-
nexes the warning against offending one of these little ones, onav-
Sa^eiv h'a T&V fUKpuv -ovruv, an epitliet wliicli, in x. 42, is applied
to the disciples of Jesus, but in this passage, apparently, to children.:}:

Mark (v. 42) lias tlie same continuation, notwithstanding the inter-
ruption above noticed, probably because lie forsook Luke (wlio here
breaks off tlie discourse, and docs not introduce the admonition
against offences until later, xvii. 1. f., and apart from any occasion
tliat might prompt it), and appealed to Matthew.§ Then follows in
Matthew (v. 8 f.) and Mark (v. 43 f.) a passage which alone ought
to open tlie eyes of commentators to tlie mode in wliicli tlie synop-
tists arrange tlie sayina's of Jesus. To tlie warning against tlie of-
fending, OKavSaXi^Eiv, of tlie little ones, and tlie woe pronounced on
tliose by whom offences come, TO andv6a'A,ov Kp^e-ai, they annex the
apothegm on tlie offending ana.vSaA.'i^uv, of the liand, eye, &c. Je-
sus could not proceed tlius,-for the injunctions: Mislead not the
little ones! and, Let not your sensuality mislead you! have nothing
in common but tlie word mislead.  It is easy, however, to account

* Ceber den Lukas, S. 1 aS f.

•i" Comp. De Wette, in loc.

+ v;.) frit.,....1.0

nrl Tlo Wntto

MSCOUESES OP JESUS IN THE THEEE FIEST GOSPELS.   385

for their association by the writer of the first Gospel.* Tlie word
anavSa^Eiv recalled to his mind all tlie discourses of Jesus contain-
ing a similar expression that liad come to his knowledge, and also
he had previously presented the admonitions concerning seduction
by the members, in a better connexion, as part of the sermon on tlie
mount, he could not resist the temptation of reproducing them here,
for tlie sake of this slight verbal affinity with the foregoing text.
But at v. 10 he resumes the thread which he had dropped at v. 7,
and adds a further discourse on the little ones, fuapov^. Matthew
makes Jesus confirm the value of the little ones bv tlie declaration,
that the Son of Man was come to seek tlie lost, and by tlie parable
of the lost sheep, (v. 11-14). It is not, however, evident wliy Je-
sus should class the [UKpovc with tlie drroXGi^bc; (lost) ; and botli ths
declaration and tlie parable seem to be better placed by Luke, wlio
introduces the former in tlie narrative of the calling of Zacclieus (xix.
10.), and tlie latter, in a reply to the objections of tlie Pharisees
against the amity of Jesus with the publicans (xv. 3 ff.). Matthew
seems to have placed them here, merely because tlie discourse on tlie
little ones reminded him of tliat on the lost,-botli exemplifying the
mildness and humility of Jesus.

Between tlie moral of tlie above parable (v. 14) and the follow-
ing rules for tlie conduct of Christians under injuries (v. 15 ff.), there
is again only a verbal connexion, which may be traced by means of
the words, dm^fjTai, should perish, and sKspSrjaa^, thou hast gained;

for tlie proposition : God wills not tliat one of tliese little ones sliould
perish, might recall tlie proposition: We sliould endeavour to win
over our brother, by sliowing a readiness to forgive.  The direction
to bring the offender before the church, kK.n'kqaia, is generally ad-
duced as a proof tliat Jesus intended to found a church. But he here
speaks of the KKK^Tjaia as an institution already existing: hence we
must either refer the expression to the Jewisli synagogue, an inter-
pretation which is favoured by tlie analogy of this direction with
Jewish precepts ; or if, according to- the strict meaning of the word
and its connexion, EKic^fjaia must be understood as tlie designation
of the Christian community, which did not tlien exist, it must be
admitted tliat we liave liere, at least in the form of expression, an
anticipation of a subsequent state of things.f The writer certainly
had in view tlie new church, eventually to be founded in the name
of Jesus, when, in continuation, lie represented the latter as impart-
ing to tlie body of the disciples the authority to bind and to loose,
previously given to Peter, and thus to form a messianic religious
constitution. Tlie declarations concerning the success of unanimous
prayer, and tlie presence of Jesus among two or tliree gathered to-
gether in his name, accord with this prospective idea4

The next discourse that presents itself (Matt. xix. 3-12, Mark,

'" Comp. De Wette, in loc. Matt.   + Vid. De "Wette, exeg. Handlmch 1, .1, p. 155.

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

386

x. 2-12), though belonging, according to the evangelists, to the last
journey of Jesus, is of the same stamp with tlie disputations which
they, for tlie most part, assign to the last residence of Jesus in Je-
rusalem.  Some Pharisees propose to Jesus the question, at tliat
time much discussed in the Jewish schools,* whether it be lawful
for a man to put away his wife for every cause. To avoid a contra-
diction between modern practice and tlie dictum of Jesus, it has
been alleged that lie here censures tlie species of divorce, which was
tlie only one known at that period, namely, the arbitrary dismissal
of a wife; but not the 1'udicial separation resorted to in the present
tiay.f But tills very argument involves the admission, tliat Jesus
denounced all the forms of divorce known to him; hence tlie ques-
tion still remains whether, if lie could have liad cognizance of the
modern procedure in disolving matrimony, lie would have held it
right to limit Ins general censure. Of the succeeding declaration,
prompted by a question of tlie disciples,f namely, that celibacy may
be practised for the kingdom of heaven's sake, Jesus himself says,
that it cannot be understood by all, but only by tliosc to zulwm it
is given (v. 11). That tlie doctrine of Jesus may not run counter
to modern opinion, it lias been eagerly suggested, tliat his panegyric
on celibacy liad relation solely to tlie circumstances of tlie coming
time, or to tlie nature of tlie apostolic mission, which would be im-
peded by family tics.§ But there is even less intimation of this
special bearing in tlio text, than in the analogous passage 1 Cor.
vii. 25 ft., || and, adhering to a simple interpretation, it must be
granted that we have here one of tlie instances in which ascetic
principles, such as were then prevalent, especially among tlie Es-
.senes,^ manifest themselves in the teaching of Jesus, as represented
in tlie synoptical gospels.

The controversial discourses whicli Matthew, almost throuo'hout

'                                           0

in agreement with tlie other synoptists, places after tlie entrance of
Jesus into Jerusalem (xxi. 23-27 ; xxii. 15-46),** are certainly
pre-eminently genuine fragments, having precisely tlie spirit and tone
of the rabbinical dialectics in tlie time of Jesus. The third and fifth
among them are particularly worthy of note, because they exhibit
Jesus as an interpreter of Scripture. With respect to tlie former,
wherein Jesus endeavours to convince the Sadducees that there will
be a resurrection of the dead, from the Mosaic designation of God

-                                                                      0

as the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, maintaining tliat he
is not tlie God of the dead, but of the living (Matt. xxii. 31-33

* Ber.ndbar R, ad. Num. v. 30, in Wetstein, p. 303.   i- E. g. Paulas, L. J. 1. B.
S. 4G. ^ For probable doubts as to the correctness of the position given to this discourse
of Jesus, vid. Neander, L. J. Chr. S. 525, Anm.  '6 Paulus, ib. ri. 50, exeg. Handb. 2, S.

•SCO.   i]| In tilis passage, it is true that celibacy is at first recommended as good for the
present distress ; but tlie Apostle iloes not rest there ; for at v. 32 fl. lie adds, lie that is
unmarried carhth fur fhc tiling n^'tke Lord--he that is murr'u-d j\n' i/ie thim/s oJ'the world:

-a motive to celibacy which must lie equally valid undrr all circumstances, and which

-nffiir,^ in; ;i o-linnise into the fundamental asceticism of Paul's views.  Comp. Kuckert's

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THREE PIEST OOSPELS.   387

parall.): Paulus admits that Jesus here argues subtilly, while lie
contends tliat the conclusion is really involved in tlie premises. But
in tlie expression tsiT^-'n^ the God of Abrahmn &c., which had
become a mere formula, nothing more is implied than that Jehovah,
as lie had been the protecting Deity of these men, would for ever
continue such to their posterity. An individual relation subsisting
between Jehovah and the patriarchs after their death, is nowhere
else alluded to in the Old Testament, and could only be discovered
in tlie above form by rabbinical interpreters, at a time when it was
thought desirable, at any cost, to show tliat the idea of immortality,
whicli liad become prevalent, was contained in the law; where, how-
ever, it is not to be met with by unprejudiced eyes. We find the
relation of God to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, adduced as a guar-
antee of immortality el-sewhcre in rabbinical argumentations, all of
which could hardly have been modelled on this one of Jesus.* If
we look into tlie most recent commentaries, we nowhere find a candid
confession as to tlie real character of tlie argumentation in question.
Olshausen lias wonders to tell of the deep truth contained in it, and
thinks that lie can deduce from it, in the shortest way, tlie authen-
ticity and divinity of tlie Pentateuch. Paulus sees tlie validity of
the proof between tlie lines of tlie text; Fritzsche is silent. Where-
fore these evasions ? Why is the praise of having seen clearly, and
spoken openly, in tills matter, abandoned to tlie Wolfenbiittel Frag-
mentist ?t Wliat spectres and doublesighted beings, must Moses
and Jesus have been, if they mixed wdth their cotcmporaries with-
out any real participation in their opinions and weaknesses, their
joys and griefs; if, mentally dwelling apart from their age and na-
tion, they conformed to tliese relations only externally and by ac-
commodation, wdiile, internally and according to their nature, they
stood among tlie foremost ranks of the enlightened in modern times '.
Far more noble were tliese men, nay, they would then only engage
our sympathy and reverence, if, in a genuinely human manner, strug-
gling with tlie limitations and prejudices of their age, they succumbed
to them in a hundred secondary matters, and only attained perfect
freedom, in relation to the one point by which each was destined to
contribute to tlie advancement of mankind.

A controversial question concerning tlie Mcssiali is proposed (v.
51-46) to the Pharisees by Jesus, namely, How can tlie same per-
sonage be at once the Lord and tlie son of David ? Paulus maintains
tliat tilis is a model of interpretation in conformity with the text;{
an assertion which is no good augury tliat his ov- possesses that
qualification. According to him, Jesus, in asking how David could
call tlie Mcssiali, .Lord, when in tlie general opinion he was his son,
intended to apprise tlie Pharisees, that in tilis Psalm it is not David
who is speaking of tlie Messiah, but another poet wdio is speaking

* Vid. Gemara Hieros. Berac. f. v. 4, in Liglitfoot, p. 423, and E. Manasse Ben Isr.
in Schottgen, i. p. 180.   •}• See his 4th Fragment, Lessing'3 4tem Bcitrag, S, 434 ff.

388 THE LIFE OP JESUS.

of David as his lord, so that to suppose this warlike psalm a mes-
sianic one, is a mistake. Why, asks Paulus, should not Jesus have
found out this interpretation, since it is the true one? But this is
tlie grand error of his entire scheme of interpretation-to suppose
that what is truth in itself, or more correctly, for us, must, even to
tlie minutest details, liavc been truth for Jesus and the apostles.
The majority of ancient Jewish interpreters apply this psalm to the
Messiah ;* tlie apostles use it as a prophecy concerning Christ (Acts
ii. 34 f. ; 1 Cor. xv. 25); Jesus himself, according to Matthew and
Mark, adds t'v Trvevfian to C^afUS ica^sl avr'ov K.vplov, thus plainly
giving liis approval to tlie notion that it is David wlio there speaks,
and that tlie Messiah is liis subject: how then can it be thought
tliat he held tlie contrary opinion ? It is far more probable, as Ols-
hausen has well shown, that Jesus believed the psalm to be a mes-
sianic one: while, on the oilier hand, Paulus is equally correct in
maintaining tliat it originally referred, not to the Messiah, but to
some Jewish ruler, whether David or another. Thus we find that
Jesus here gives a model of interpretation, in conformity, not with
tlie text, but with the spirit of liis time; a discovery whicli, if tlie
above observations be just, ought to excite no surprise. The solu-
tion of the enigma which Jesus here proposes to the Pharisees, lay
without doubt, according to liis idea, in tlie doctrine of the higher
nature of tlie Mcssiali; whether he held that, in virtue of this, he
might be styled the Lord of David, while, in virtue of liis human
nature, he might also be regarded as his son ; or whether he wished
to remove tlie latter notion as erroneous.f The result, however, and
perhaps also tlie intention of Jesus with respect to tlie Pharisees,
was merely to convince them that he was capable of retaliating on
them, in their own way, by embarassing them with captious ques-
tions, and tliat with better success than they had obtained in their
attempts to entrap liim. Hence the evangelists place this passage
at the close of tlie disputations prompted by the Pharisees, and Mat-
thew adds, Neither durst any man from that day forth ask him
any more questions: a concluding form which is more suitable here
than after the lesson administered to tlie Sadducees, where it is placed
by Luke (xx. 40), or than after tlie discussion on tlie greatest com-
mandment, where it is introduced by Mark (xii. 34.);

Immediately before tills question of Jesus, the first two evan-
gelists narrate a conversation witli a lawyer, vofiiiwg, or scribe, ypafi-
/m-Evc, concerning the greatest commandment. (Matt. xxii. 34 ff.;

Mark xii. 28 ff.) Matthew annexes this conversation to the dispute
with tlie Sadducees, as if tlie Pharisees wislicd, by their question
as to the greatest commandment, to avenge tlie defeat of tlie Sad-
ducees. It is well known, however, that these sects were not thus
friendly; on the contrary, -we read in tlie Acts (xxiii. 7), tliat the
Pharisees were inclined to go over to the side of one wliom they had

.«.„., -nr . . .  . ,   TT...^^._I__ <-,i...,».i i „ c 1 In e . «l«n Pan1ns himself.

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THEEE FIRST GOSPELS.   389

previously persecuted, solely because he had had the address to take
the position of an opponent towards the Sadducees. We may Iiere
quote Schneckenburger's observation,* that Matthew not seldom
(iii. 7 ; xvi. 1) places the Pharisees and Sadducees side by side in
a way tliat represents, not their real hostility, but their association
in tlie memory of tradition, in wliich one opposite suggested another.
In flits respect, Mark's mode of annexing tills conversation to tile
foregoing, is more consistent; but all tlie synoptists seem to labour
under a common mistake in supposing tliat tliesc discussions, grouped
together in tradition on account of their analogy, followed each other
so closely in time, that one colloquy elicited another. Luke does
not give the question concerning tlie greatest commandment in con-
nexion with tlie controversies on the resurrection and on tlie Mes-
siah ; but lie lias a similar incident earlier, in his narrative of the
journey to Jerusalem (x. 25 ft'.).  The general opinion is tliat the
first two evangelists recount tlie same occurrence, and the third, a
distinct one.f It is true tliat tlie narrative of Luke differs from that
of Mattliew and Mark, in several not immaterial points.  The first
difference, which we liave already noticed, relates to chronological
position, and this has been tlie cliief inducement to tlie supposition
of two events.  The next difference lies in the nature of the ques-
tion, which, in Luke, turns on the rule of life calculated to insure
tlie inheritance of eternal life, but, in tlie other evangelists, on tlie
greatest commandment. The third difference is in tlie subject wlio
pronounces this commandment, tlie first two synoptists representing
it to be Jesus, tlie third, tlie lawyer. Lastly, there is a difference
as to tlie issue, tlie lawyer in Luke putting a second, self-vindica-
tory, question, wliich calls forth the parable of tlie good Samaritan;

while in tlie two other evangelists, lie retires either satisfied, or
silenced by tlie answer to the first.  Meanwhile, even between the
narrative of Mattliew and that of Mark, there are important diver-
gencies.  The principal relates to tlie character of the querist, wlio
in Matthew proposes liis question with a view to tempt Jesus (w<-
oa^fciv); in Mark, with good intentions, because he had perceived
that Jesus liad answered tlie Sadducees well. Paulus, indeed, al-
though lie elsewhere (Luke x. 25) considers tlie act of tempting
(e(fn-(pa^(>)v) as the putting a person to tlie proof to subserve inter-
ested views, pronounces tliat the word -retpd^uv in tills instance can
Only be intended in a good sense. But tlie sole ground for tills inter-
pretation lies, not in Mattliew; but in Mark, and in the iinlbunded
supposition tliat tlie two writers could not have a different idea
of tlie character and intention of the inquiring doctor of tlie law.
Fritzsche lias correctly pointed out the difficulty of conciliating Mat-
tliew and Mark as lying, partly in the meaning of the word mipd^v,
and parly in tlie context, it being inadmissible to suppose one among
a series of malevolent questions friendly, witliout any intimation
of the distinction on tlie part of tlie writer. With tills important

* TT.I... .1.,.. TT,.^.:,.», „ „ c a AS 17.   + Pai.lna and Olsliause.i. in loc.

390

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

diversity is connected the minor one, tliat while in Matthew, the
scribe, after Jesus lias recited the two commandments, is silent,
apparently from shame, which is no sign of a friendly disposition
on his part towards Jesus; in Mark, lie not only bestows on Jesus
tlic approving expression, Well, Muster, thou hast said the truth,
but enlarges on Ills doctrine so as to draw from Jesus the declara-
tion tliat lie lias answered discreetly, and is not far from the king-
dom of God. It may be also noticed tliat while in Matthew Jesus
simply repeats the commandment of love, in Mark lie prefaces it by
the words, Hear, 0 Israel, the .Lord t/t.y God is one .Lord. Thus,
if it be lield tliat tlie differences between tlie narrative of Luke, and
tliat of the two other evangelists, entail a necessity for supposing
that they arc founded on two separate events; tlie no slighter dif-
ferences between Mark and Mattlicw, must in all consistency be
made a reason for supposing a third. But it is so difficult to credit
the reality of three occurrences essentially alike, tliat the other alter-
native, of reducing them to one, must, prejudice apart, be always
preferred. The narratives of Mattlicw and Mark arc tlic most easily
identified ; but there are not wanting points of contact between Mat-
thew and Luke, for in both tlie lawyer vojuabc; appears as a tempter
(rreipd^w'), and is not impressed in favour of Jesus by his answer;

nor even between Luke and Mark, for these agree in appending ex-
planatory remarks to tlic greatest commandment, as w^ll as in tlic
insertion of forms of assent, such as Thou heist answered right,
Thozi hast said the truth.  Hence it is evident tliat to fuse only
two of their narratives is a half measure, and that we must cither
regard all three as independent, or all three as identical: whence
again we may observe tlie freedom wliicli was used by tlic early
Christian legend, in giving various forms to a single fact or idea,-
tlic fundamental fact in tlic present case being, tliat, out of tlie whole
Mosaic code, Jesus liad selected tlic two commandments concerning
tlic love of God and our neighbour as tlic most excellent."*

We come now to tlie great anti-pharisaic discourse, which Mat-
thew gives (xxiii.) as a sort of pitched battle after the skirmishing
of tlie preceding disputations.   Mark (xii. 38 ft'.) and Luke (xx.
45 ft'.) have also a discourse of Jesus against tlie scribes ypci/i/za-etc,
but extending no farther than a few verses. It is however highly
probable, as our modern critics allow, + that Jesus sliould launch out
into fuller invectives against tliat body of men under tlie circum-
stances in which .Mattlicw places that discourse, and it is almost
certain tliat such sharp enunciations must have preceded the cata-
strophe; so tliat it is not admissible to control tlie account of tlie
first evangelist by tlie meagre one of tlie two other synoptists,t
especially as tlic former is distinguished by connectedness and unity.
It is true tliat much of wliat Mattlicw here presents as a continuous
address, is assigned by Luke to various scenes and occasions, and

* Conip. Dr. Wette, exeg. Handb., 3, 1, S. 18C. + Sieffert, uber den Urspruns des

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THREE FIRST GOSPELS.

391

it would hence follow that the former has, in this case again, blended
the original elements of tlie discourse with kindred matter, bclono-ino-
to the discourses of various periods,* if it could be shown tliat the.
arrangement of Luke is tlie correct one: a position which must there-
fore be examined. Those parts of the anti-pharisaic harangue which
Luke has in common with Mattlicw, are, excepting tlie couple of
verses which lie places in the same connexion as Matthew, introduced
by him as concomitant with two entertainments to which lie repre-
sents Jesus as being invited by Pharisees (xi. 37 ft". ; xiv. 1 ft'.)-a
politeness on their part which appears in no other Gospel.   Tlie
expositors of tlie present day, almost with one voice, concur in ad-
miring tlie naturalness and faithfulness witli which Luke lias pre-
served to us the original occasions of tliese discourses.! It is cer-
tainly natural enough tliat, in the second entertainment, Jesus,
observing the efforts of tlie guests to obtain tlie highest places for
themselves, sliould take occasion to admonish tlicra against assuming
the precedence at feasts, even on the low ground of prudential con-
siderations ; and tills admonition appears in a curtailed form, and
without any special cause in tlic final anti-pharisaic discourse in
Matthew, Mark, and even in Luke again (xx. 46).  But is it other-
wise with tlie discourse wliicli Luke attaclics to tlie earlier entertain-
ment in tlie Pharisee's house. In tlic very commencement of this
repast, Jesus not only speaks of tlie ravening, dpnayfj, and wicked-
ness, TTorrjpia, with wliicli tlie Pharisees till tlie cup and platter, and
honours them witli the title of fools, a(j)poveg, but breaks forth into
a denunciation of woe oval, against them and tlie scribes and doctors
of the law, threatening them with retribution for all tlic blood that
liad been slied by their fathers, wliose deeds they approved. We
grant tliat Attic urbanity is not to be expected in a Jcwisli teacher,
but even according to tlie oriental standard, such invectives uttered
at, table against tlie liost and his guests, would be the grossest dere-
liction of what is due to hospitality.  Tills was obvious to Schleier-
maclier's acute perception; and lie therefore supposes tliat the meal
passed oft' amicably, and tliat it was not until its close, when Jesus
was again out of tlie house, tliat the host expressed his surprise at
the neglect of the usual ablutions by Jesus and Ins disciples, and
that Jesus answered witli so much asperity.^ But to assume that
the writer has not described tlie meal itself and the incidents tliat
accompanied it, and that lie has noticed it merely for tlie sake of its
connexion witli tlio subsequent discourse, is an arbitrary mode of
overcoming the diftieulty. For the text runs thus :  And he went
in. and sat doicn to meat. And when the Pharisee saw it, he mar-
velled tliat lie, had not first -washed before dinner. And the Lord
said unto him, elaeAOuv SK avKmoev b 6s 'S'apiaalof i6w eOavpaaev,
6ri. ov TTpu-ov sl3a~~ia0r]-• sirrs SK 6 Kvpto^ 7-p6(- avTov.   It is niani-

* Schuiz, Ulicr (las Abendmahl, S. 313 f.; Schncckcnburger, liber den Ursprung, S.
54.   t iSclileierniac-her, uber den Lukas, S. 182, 19(i, f.; Okhausen, in loc., and the

392

THE LIFE OP JESUS.

festly impossible to thrust in between these sentences the duration
of tlie meal, and it must liave been tlie intention of the writer to
attacli he. marvelled eOavyuicev to he sat down to meat dvs-reffsv, and
he said ewer to he marvelled iOav^aaev. But if this could not
really have been the case, unless Jesus violated in the grossest man-
ner tlie simplest dictates of civility, there is an end to the vaunted
accuracy of Luke in Ills allocation of tins discourse: and we have
only to inquire how he could be led to give it so false a position.
Tills is to be discovered by comparing tlie manner in which tlie two
Other synoptists mention the offence of tile Pharisees, at the omis-
sion of tlie ablutions before meals by Jesus and his disciples: a cir-
cumstance to wliicli they annex discourses different from those given
by Luke. In Matthew (xv. 1 ft'), scribes and Pharisees from Je-
rusalem ask Jesus why his disciples do not observe tlie custom of
washing before meat? It is thus implied tliat they knew of this
omission, as may easily be supposed, by report. In Mark (vil. 1 ff.),
they look on (tdovTe?), while some disciples of Jesus cat witli ua-
•washen hands, and call them to account, for this irregularity. Lastly,
in Luke, Jesus himself dines with a Pharisee, and on tills occasion
it is observed, that lie neglects tlie usual wasliings. This is an evi-
dent climax : hearing, witnessing taking food togetlier. Was it form-
ed, in tlie descending gradation, from Luke to Mattliew, or, in the
ascending one, from Mattliew to Luke ? From tlie point of view-
adopted by the recent critics of tlie first Gospel, tlie former mode
will be held tlie most probable, namely, that the memory of the
original scene, tlie repast in the Pharisee's house, was lost in the
process of tradition, and is therefore wanting in tlie first Gospel.
But, apart from tlie difficulty of conceiving tliat this discourse was
uttered under tlie circumstances with wliicli it is invested by Luke,
it is by no means in accordance with tlie course of tradition, when
once in possession of so dramatic a particular as a feast, to let it fall
again, but rather to supply it, if lacking. The general tendency of
the legend is to transform the abstract into the concrete, the mediate
into tlie immediate, liearsay into vision, tlie spectator into the par-
ticipator ; and as the offence taken against Jesus by tlie Pharisees
referred, among other tilings, to the usages of tlie table, notliing was
more natural than for legend to associate the origin of tlie offence
with a particular place and occasion, and for tills purpose to imagine
invitations given to Jesus by Pharisees-invitations wliicli would
be historically suspicious, if for no other reason than tliat Luke alone
knows anything of them.  Here, then, we again find Luke in his
favourite employment of furnishing a frame to tlie discourses of Je-
sus which tradition had delivered to him; a procedure much farther
removed from historic faithfulness, than tlie effort of Mattliew to give
unity to discourses gathered from different periods, without adding
matter of his own.  Tlie formation of tlie climax above displayed,
can only be conceived, in accordance with tlie general relation be-
tween the synoptists, in the following manner: Mark, who in this

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE THEEE FIEST GOSPELS.   393

instance evidently had Matthew before him, enriched his account
with the dramatic expression Moyrec; while Luke, independent of
botli, has added a repast, Sel-nvov, whether presented to him by a
more developed tradition, or invented by Ills own more fertile im-
agination. Together with this unhistorical position, the proportions
themselves seem to be disfigured in Luke (xi. 39-4:1, 49.), and the
observation of tlie lawyer, Master, thus saying thou reproachest us
also (xi. 45), too much resembles an artificial transition from the
pliilippic against the Pharisees, to that against the doctors of tlie law.*

Another passage in this discourse lias been tlie subject of much
discussion. It is that (v. 35) in which Jesus threatens his cotem-
poraries, tliat all tlie innocent blood shed from that of Abel to tliat
of Zacharias, the son of Baracliias, slain in the temple, will be re-
quired of their generation.  Tlie Zacharias of whom sucli an end is
narrated 2 Chron. xxiv. 20 ft', was a son, not of Baracliias, but of
Jehoiada.  On tlie oilier hand, there was a Zacliarias, the son of
Barucli, who came to a similar end in tlie Jewish war.')' Moreover,
it appears unlikely tliat Jesus would refer to a murder which took
place 850 B. c. as tlie last. Hence it was at first supposed tliat we
have in v. 35 a prophecy, and afterwards, a confusion of tlie earlier
with tlie later event; and the latter notion lias been used as an ac-
cessory proof that the first gospel is a posterior compilation.^ It is,
however, equally probable, tliat tlie Zacliarias, son of Jehoiada, whose
death is narrated in tlie Chronicles, lias been confounded witli tlie
prophet Zachariah, wlio -was a son of Baracliias (Zacli. i. 1; LXX.;

Baruch, in Josephus, is not tlie same name) ;§ especially as a Targum,
evidently in consequence of a like confusion with tlie prophet who
was a grandson oflddo, calls tlie murdered Zachariah a son of Iddo.|]
The murder of a prophet, mentioned by Jeremiah (xxvi. 23.), was
doubtless subsequent to tliat of Zachariah, but in tlie Jewisli order
of tlie canonical books, Jeremiah precedes tlie Chronicles; and to
oppose a murder revealed in the first canonical book, to one recorded
in the last, was entirely in the style of Jewisli parlance.'lT

After having considered all tlie discourses of Jesus given by
Mattliew, and compared them witli their parallels, with tlie exception
of tliose wliicli had come before us in previous discussions, or which
have yet to come before us in our examination of single incidents in
the public ministry, or of the history of tlie passion: it might appeal-
requisite to tlie completeness of our criticism, tliat we sliould also
give a separate investigation to tlie connexion in which tlie two otiier
synoptists give tlie discourses of Jesus, and from this point review
the parallels in Mattliew. But we have already cast a comparative
glance over the most remarkable discourses in Luke and Mark, and

* Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, S. IS'J. 1, 2, S. G7, 76.   •i- Joseph b. j. iv.
v. 4   t Eichhorn, Einleitung in das N. T., 1, S. 510 ff.; Hug, Einl. in das N. T., 2, S.
10 ff.; Credner, Eiul., 1, S. 207.   ^ Vid. Theile, fiber Zacharias Barachias Sohn, in'
Winer's und Engcllinrdt's neuem krit. Journ., 2, S. 401 tf.; De Wette, in loc. || Targum
TIiren- ii- 20 in Wiit^pii-i ^ l<ll   T f^.^^ it^ ^v^^ :^ i..,.

394 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

gone through the parables which are peculiar to each ; and as to the
remainder of -what they offer in the form of discourses, it will either
come under our future consideration, or if not, the point of view from
which it is to be criticised, has been sufficiently indicated in the fore-
going investigations.