CHAPTER III.
LOCALITY AND CHRONOLOGY OP THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

§ 57. DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE SYNOPTICAL WRITERS AND JOHN,
AS TO THE CUSTOMARY SCENE OF THE MINISTRY OF JESUS.

ACCORDINO to the synoptical writers, Jesus, horn indeed at
Bethlehem'in Judea, but brought up at Nazareth in Galilee, only
absented himself from Galilee during the short interval between his

* Note 1. f Bertholdt, Christolog. Judseorum Jesu aetate, § 36. not. 1, and 2; Fritz-
Bche, ComiTi. in Matth. S. 1C9 f. f. Compare with the above statement the deductions of
Schmidt, Fritzsuhe. and TTsteri. na n-iven a !•,! nn>»= 1-a .

274

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

baptism and tlic imprisonment of the Baptist; immediately after
which, lie returned thither and began Ills ministry, teaching, healing,
callina; disciples, so as to traverse all Galilee ; using as tlic centre
of his agency, his previous dwelling-place, Nazareth, alternately
with Capernaum, on tlie nortli-wcst border of the lake of Tiberias
(Matt. iv. 12-25. parall.).  Mark and Luke liave many particulars
concerning tills ministry in Galileo which arc not found in Matthew,
and those which they liave in common with him are arranged in a
different order; but as they all agree in tlie geograpliical circuit
which they assign to Jesus, tlie account of tlie first evangelist may
serve as tlie basis of our criticism. According to him tlie incidents
narrated took place in Galilee, and partly in Capernaum down to
viii. 18, where Jesus crosses tlie Galilcan sea, but is scarcely landed
on the east side when lie returns to Capernaum.  Here follows a
series of scenes connected by short transitions, such as -rapaydn'
KnelOev (ix. 9, 27), passing from thence, -6-e (v. 14.), then, ravro.
avTov XaXovvToc; (v. 18), rchile he spake these things ; expressions
which can imply no important change of place, tliat is, of one prov-
ince for another, which it is the liabit of tlie writer to mark much
more carcfullv.  Tlie passage, ix. 35, Trept^yev 6 '\T]GOVI; ra(; no^eif
ndaac;-SiSdcKW ev ral(; avvaywyalc; av-uv, is evidently only a repeti-
tion of iv. 23, and is therefore to be understood merely of excursions
in Galilee.  Tlic message of tlie Baptist (cliap. xi.) is also received
by Jesus in Galilee, at least such appears to be tlie opinion of the
narrator, from his placing in immediate connexion the complaints
of Jesus against tlie Galilean cities. When delivering the parable
in chap. xiii. Jesus is by the sea, doubtless tliat of Galilee, and, as
there is mention of his house, olida (v. 1.), probably in the vicinity
of Capernaum.  Next, after having visited his native city Nazareth
(xiii. 53.) he passes over the sea (xiv. 13.), according to Luke (ix.
10.), into tlie country of Bcthsaida (Julias); whence, however, after
the miracle of the loaves, he speedily returns to the western border
xiv. 34.). Jesus tlien proceeds to tlie northern extremity of Pal-
estine, on the frontiers of Phoenicia (xv. 21.); soon, however, re-
turned to tlie sea of Galilee (v. 29), he takes ship to tlie eastern
side, in the coast of Magdala (v. 39), but again departs northward
into tlie country of Gcsarca Pliilippi (xvi. 13.), in the vicinity of
Lebanon, among tlie lower ridges of which is to be souglit the
mount of the transfiguration (xvii. 1.). After journeying in Galilee
for some time longer with his disciples (xvii. 22.), and once more
visiting Capernaum (v. 24.), lie leaves Galilee (xix. 1) to travel (as
it is most probably explained*) through Perea into Judca, (a journey
which, according to Luke ix. 52, lie seems to liave made through
Samaria); xx. 17, he is on his way to Jerusalem ; v. 29, lie cornea
through Jericho; and xxL 1, is in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem,
which, v. 10, lie enters.

Thus, according to tlie synoptical writers, Jesus, from his return

LOCALITY OP THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

275

after being baptized Tby John, to his final journey to Jerusalem,

never goes beyond the limits of North Palestine, but traverses tlie
countries west and east of tlie Galilcan sea and tlie upper Jordan,
in tlie dominions of Herod Antipas and Philip, witliout touching on
Samaria to tlic south, still less Judca, or tlic country under tlie im-
mediate administration of tlie Romans. And within those limits, to
be still more precise, it is tlie land west of tlie Jordan, and the
sea of Tibcrias, and therefore Galilee, tlic province of Antipas, in.
which Jesus is especially active; only three short excursions on the
eastern border of the sea, and two scarcely longer on tlic northern
frontiers of tlie country, being recorded.

Quite otherwise is the theatre of the ministry of Jesus marked
out in the fourth Gospel. It is true that here also he goes after his
baptism by Jolin into Gallk-.c, to the wedding at Cana (ii. 1.), and
from thence to Capernaum (v. 12); but in a few days the approach-
ing pas?o\cr calls him to Jerusalem (v. 13.). From Jerusalem he
proceeds into tlic country of Judea (iii. 22.), and after some time
exercising his ministry there (iv. 1.), he returns through Samaria
into Galilee (v. 43). Nothing is reported of his agency in this prov-
ince but a single cure, and immediately on this a new feast sum-
mons him to Jerusalem (v. 1.), where lie is represented as perform-
ing a cure, being persecuted, and delivering long discourses, until lie
betakes himself (vi. 1.) to the eastern shore of tlic sea of Tibcrias,
and from thence to Capernaum (v. 17, 59). He then itinerates for
some time in Galilee (vii. 1), but again leaves it, on occasion of
tlie feast of tabernacles, for Jemsalein (v. 2, 10). To tills visit the
evangelist refers many discourses and vicissitudes of Jesus (vii. 10;

x. 21.), and moreover connects with it the commencement of his
public minisliy at tlie feast of dedication, witliout noticing any in-
termediate journey out of Jerusalem and Judca (x. 22.). After tills
Jesus again retires into the country of Perca, where lie liad first
been witli the Baptist (x. 40.), and there remains until the death of
Lazarus recalls him to Betliany, near Jerusalem (xi. 1.), whence lie
withdraws to Ephraim, in tlie vicinity of tlie wilderness of Judca,

until tlie approach of tlic passover, which lie visited as his last
(xii. 1 ff.).

Thus, according to John, Jesus was present at four feasts in Je-
rusalem, before tlie final one: was besides once in Bethany, and

had been active for a considerable time in Judca and on his journey
through Samaria.

Why, it must be asked, have tlie synoptical writers been silent
on tills frequent presence of Jesus in Judca and Jerusalem ? Why
have they represented tlic matter, as if Jesus, before Ills last fatal
journey to Jerusalem, liad not overstepped the limits of Galileo and
Pcrca'/ Tills discrepancy between tlie synoptical writers and Jolin
was long overlooked in the church, and of late it lias been tliouglit
feasible to deny its existence. It lias been said, tliat Matthew, at

thr1 prtmmni>^^->""+ 1--~ ^i           '   ^ '"       ' "

276

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

pursues his narrative without noticing any journey into Judea until
the last; but that we are not lience to conclude that Matthew was
unacquainted with the earlier ministry of Jesus in Judea, for as with
this evangelist the local interest is subordinate to the effort at an
appropriate arrangement of his events, many particulars in the for-
mer part of his history, which he narrates without indicating any
place, may have been known, though not stated by him, to have
occurred in the earlier journeys and residences in Judea.* But this
alleged subordination of tlic local interest in Matthew, is nothing
more than a fiction of the harmonist, ;iS Schneckenburger lias re-
cently proved.! Matthew very carefully marks (cliap. iv.) the be-
ginning and (chap. xix.) the end of the almost exclusive residence
of Jesus in Galileo; all the intervening narration must therefore be
regarded as belonging to tliat residence, unless tlie contrary be ex-
pressed; and since the evangelist is on the alert to notice the'short
excursions of Jesus across the lake and into the north of Galilee,
he would hardly pass over in silence tlie more important, and some-
times prolonged visits to Judea, liad they been known or credited
by him. Thus much only is to be allowed, that Matthew frequently
neglects the more precise statement of localities, as the designation
of the spot or neighbourhood in wliicli Jesus laboured from time to
time: but in his more general biographical statements, such as the
designation of the territories and provinces of Palestine, within the
"boundaries of which Jesus exercised his ministry, he is as accurate
as any other evangelist.

Expositors must therefore accommodate themselves to the ad-
mission of a difference between the synoptical writers and John,^
and those who think it incumbent on them to harmonize the Gos-
pels must take care lest this difference be found a contradiction;

which can only be prevented by deducing tlie discrepancy, not from
a disparity between the ideas of the evangelists as to the sphere of;

the ministry of Jesus, but from the difference of mental bias under
which they severally wrote.  Some suppose that Matthew, being a
Galilean, saw the most interest in G-alilean occurrences, and lience
Confined his narrative to them, though aware of the agency of Jesus
at Jerusalem.§ But wliat biographer, wlio liad himself accompanied
his hero into various provinces, and belield his labours there, would
confine his narration to what he had performed in his (the biogra-
pher's) native province? Sucli provincial exclusiveness would surely
be quite unexampled. Hence others have preferred the supposition
that Matthew, writing at Jerusalem, purposely selected from the
mass of discourses and actions of Jesus with wliicli lie was ac-
quainted, those of which G-alilec was tlie theatre, because they were
the least known at Jerusalem, and required narrating more than
what had happened within tlie hearing, and was fresh in tlie memo-

* Olshausen, Libl. Cornm., 1, S. 189 f. f SchneckenLurger, Beitrage, S. 38 f.i iibel
den Ursprung u. 8. {. S. 7 f. f Ue Wette, Einleitimg in das N. T. (; 98 u. 10G. § Pair

277

LOCALITY OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

ries of its inhabitants.* In opposition to this it has been already
remarked,! that there is no proof of Mattliew's Gospel being espec-
ially intended for the Christians of Judea and Jerusalem: that even
assuming this, a reference to tlie events which had happened in the
reader's own country could not be superfluous ; and that, lastly, tlie
like limitation of the ministry of Jesus to Galilee by Mark and Luke
cannot be thus accounted for, since these evangelists obviously did
not write for Judea, (neither were they Galileans, so that this objec-
tion is equally valid against the first explanation ;) and were not in
so servile a relation to Matthew as to have no access to independent
information that might give them a more extended horizon. It is
curious enough that these two attempts to solve the contradiction
between the synoptical writers and John, are themselves in the
same predicament of mutual contradiction. For if Matthew has
been silent on the incidents in Judea, according to one, on account
of his proximity, according to tlie other, on account of his remote-
ness, it follows that, two contrary hypotheses being made with
equal ease to explain the same fact, both are alike inadequate.

No supposition founded on the local relations of the writers suf-
ficing to explain the difference in question, liiglier ground must be
taken, in a consideration of the spirit and tendency of the evangeli-
cal writings. From this point of view the following proposition lias
been given: The cause wliicli determined tlie difference in the con-
tents of tlie fourth Gospel and that of the synoptical ones, accounts
also for their divergency as to tlie limits they assign to the min-
istry of Jesus; in other words, the discourses delivered by Jesus
in Jerusalem, and recorded by John, required for their comprehen-
sion a more mature development of Christianity than that presented
in the first apostolic period ; hence they were not retained in the
primitive evangelical tradition, of which the synoptical writers were
the organs, and were first restored to tlie church by John, who
wrote when Christianity was in a more advanced stage.j: But nei-
ther is tills attempt at an explanation satisfactory, though it is less
superficial than the preceding. For how could tlie popular and tlie
esoteric in the teaching of Jesus be separated with such nicety,
that tlie former should be confined to Galilee, and the latter to Je-
rusalem (tlie harsh discourse in the synagogue at, Capernaum alone
excepted ?) It may be said: in Jerusalem he had a more enlio-ht-
encd public around him, and could be more readily understood tlian
in Galilee.   But the Galileans could scarcely have misunderstood
Jesus more lamentably than did tlie Jews from first to last, accord-
ing to John's representation, and as in Galileo lie liad the most un-
disturbed communion with Ills disciples, we should ratlier have con-
jectured that here would be the scene of his more profound instruc-

* Guerike, Beitriige zur Einleitung in das N. T., S. 33 ; Tholuck, GlauhwUrdigkeit,
S. 303.   f Schneckenburger, ulier den Ursprung u. s. w., S. 9.   { Kern, uber den Ur.
sprung des Evang. Matthai, in der Triliinger Zeitschrift, 1834, 2tes Heft S. 198 ff Comp
Hug, Einl. in das N. T., 2, S. 203 ff. (3te Ausg.)

278

T;I;: LIFE OF JESUS.

tion. Besides, as tlic synoptical writers have given a plentiful glean-
ing of lucid and popular discourses from the final residence of Jesus
in Jerusalem, there is no ground whatever for believing tliat his ear-
lier visits were devoid of such, and that his converse on these occa-
sions took throughout a higher tone.   But even allowing that all
the earlier discourses of Jesus in Judea and Jerusalem were beyond
the range of tlic first apostolic tradition, deeds were performed
there, such as tlic cure of tlic man who Iiad liad an infirmity thirty-
eight years, the conferring of siglit on the man Lorn blind, and the
raising of Lazarus, wliicli, from their imposing rank among tlic evi-
dences of Christianity, must almost have necessitated the mention
of tliosc early visits of Jesus to Judea during wliieli tlicy occurred.

Thus it is impossible to explain why the synoptical writers, if
they knew of tlic earlier visits of Jesus to Jerusalem, should not
have mentioned them, and it must be concluded tliat if John be
right, the first three evangelists knew nothing of an essential part of
the earlier ministry of Jesus; if, on tlic other hand, tlic Lritcr be
right, file author of tlic fourth Gospel, or of tlic tradition by which
lie was giiidcd, fabricated a large portion of wliat lie lias narrated
concerning the ministry of Jesus, or at least assigned to it a false
locality.

On a closer examination, however, tlie relation between Jolin and
the synoptical writers is not simply sucli, tliat tlic latter might not
know wliat tlic former records, but such, that they must have pro-
ceeded from positively opposite data. For example, tlic synoptical
writers, Matthew especially, as often as Jesus leaves Galllcc, from
the time tliat lie takes up his abode there after tlic Baptist's im-
prisonment, seldom neglect to give a particular reason; such as
that lie wislied to escape from tlie crowd by a passage across the
sea (Matt. viii. 18), or tliat lie withdrew into tlie wilderness of Pcrea
to avoid tlic snares of Herod (xiv. 13), or tliat lie retired into the
region of Tyre and Sidon on account of tlie offence taken by the
scribes at his preaching (xv. 21.) : John, on tlic contrary, generally
alleges a special reason wliy Jesus leaves Judea and retires into Ga-
lilce. Not to contend tliat his very iirst journey thither appears to
be occasioned solely bv tlie invitation to Cana, his departure again
into Galileo after tlie tirst passovcr attended by him in his public
character, is expressly accounted for by tlic ominous attention which
tlie increasing number of his disciples liad excited among tlie Phari-
sees (iv. 1 ff.).  His retirement after tlie second feast also, into tlie
country cast of tlie Sea of Tibcrias (vi. 1.), must be viewed in re-
lation to tlic iy^rovv avTov ol 'lovSaloi aTTOfcmrai (v. 18.), since im-
mediately after, tlic evangelist assigns as a reason for tlic continu-
ance of Jesus in Galllee, tlie malignant designs of his enemies, winch
rendered his abode in Judea perilous to his life (vii. 1.).  The inter-
val between tlic Feast of Tabernacles and tlic Feast of tlio Dedica-
tion seems to have been spent by Jesus in tlie capital,* no unpro-

LOCALITY OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

279

pitious circumstances compelling him to absent Iiimself (x. 22.); on
the other hand his journey into Perca (x. 40.) and tliat into Ephraim
(xi. 54.) are presented as effects of his persecution by tlie Jews.

Thus precisely tlie same relation as tliat which exists between
Matthew and Luke, witli respect to tlic original dwelling-place of
the parents of Jesus, is found between tlie first three evangelists
and the fourth, with respect to the principal theatre of his ministry.
As, in the former instance, Matthew presupposes Bethlehem to be
tlie original place of abode, and Nazareth tlie one subsequently
adopted through fortuitous circumstances, while Luke gives tlie con-
trary representation ; so in tlie latter, tlie entire statement of the
synoptical writers turns on the idea tliat, until his last journey, Ga-
lilee v/as tlie cliosen rield of tlie labours of Jesus, and tliat lie only
left it occasionally, from particular motives and for a short time ;

while that of John, on tlie contrary, turns on tlie supposition, tliat
Jesus would have taught solely in Judea and Jerusalem had not
prudence sometimes counselled him to retire into tlie more remote
provinces.*

Of tlicsc two representations one only can be true. Before they
were perceived to be contradictory, tlie narrative of John was incor-
porated with tliat of tlic synoptical writers ; since they have been
allowed to be in-cconcileable, the verdict lias always been in favour
of the fourth evangelist; and so prevalent is this custom, that even
tlie author of tlie Probabilia does not use tlie difference to the dis-
advantage of tlie latter.  De Wette numbers it among the objec-
tions to tlie authenticity of Mattlicw's G-ospcl, tliat it erroneously
limits tlie ministry of Jesus to Galileo, f and Schneckcnburger has
no more important ground of doubt to produce against the apostolic
origin of tlie first canonical Gospel, tlian tlic unacquaintance of its
author with tlie extra-Galilcan labours of Jcsus.t If tills decision
be well-founded, it must rest on a careful consideration of the ques-
tion, wliicli of the two incompatible narratives lias tlic greater cor-
roboration from external sources, and tlic more internal verisimili-
tude ? We have shown in tlic introduction tliat tlie external evi-
dence or testimony for tlic authenticity of the fourth Gospel and of
tlic synoptical ones, tliat of Mattliew emphatically, is of about equal
value ; that is, it determines nothing in cither case, but leaves the
decision to tlic internal evidence.  In relation to this, tlic following
question must be considered: is it more probable tliat, although Je-
sus was actually often in Judea and Jerusalem previous to Ills last
journey, yet at tlie time and place whence tlie synoptical gospels
arose, all traces of the fact liad disappeared; or tliat, on tlic contrary,
although Jesus never entered Judea for the exercise of his public
ministry before his last journey thither, yet at tlie time and place
of tlie composition of tlie fourth Gospel a tradition of several such
visits liad been formed ?

* Comp. LUckc, ut sup. S. 546. -i- De Wette, Einl. in daa N. T., § 98. f Schnecken.

280

THE LIFE OF JESU9.

The above critics seek to show that the first might be the case,
in tlie following manner. Tlie first Gospel, they say* and more or
less the two middle ones, contain the tradition concerning the life
of Jesus as it was formed in Galilee, where the memory of what Je-
sus did and said in tliat province would be preserved with a natural
partiality,-wliile, of that part of his life which was spent out of
Galilee, only the most critical incidents, such as his birth, consecra-
tion, and especially his last journey, wliicli issued in his death, would
bo retained; for the remainder, including his early journeys to the
various feasts, being either unknown or forgotten, so that any frag-
ments of information concerning one or other of tlie previous resi-
dences of Jesus at Jerusalem would be referred to tlie last, no other
being known.

But John himself, in whom our theologians rest all their confi-
dence, expressly mentions (iv. 45) that at tlie first passover visited
by Jesus after his baptism (and probably at others also) the Galileans
were present, and apparently in great numbers, since as a conse-
quence of their having witnessed his works in Jerusalem, Jesus
found a favourable reception in Galilee. If we add to tlus, that
most of the disciples wlio accompanied Jesus in his early journeys
to the feasts were Galileans (John iv. 22, ix. 2), it is inconceivable
that tidings of tlie ministry of Jesus at Jerusalem should not from
the first reach Galilee. Once tliere, could time extinguish them?
We grant that it ia in the nature of tradition to fuse and remodel
its materials, and as the last journey of Jesus to Jerusalem was pre-
eminently memorable, it might absorb tlie recollections of the pre-
vious ones. But tradition lias also another impulse, and it is its
strongest; namely to glorify. It may indeed be said tliat to circum-
scribe the early ministry of Jesus by the frontiers of Galilee would
serve the purpose of glorifying that province, in which tlie synoptical
tradition had its origin. But the aim of tlie synoptical legend was
not to glorify Galilee, on which it pronounces severe judgments;-
Jesus is tlie object round whicli it would cast a halo, and his great-
ness is proportionate to the sphere of his influence. Hence, to show
that from the beginning of his ministry lie made himself known
beyond the Galilean angulus terras, and tliat he often presented
himself on the brilliant theatre of tlie capital, especially on occasions
when it was crowded witli spectators and hearers from all regions,
was entirely according to the bent of the legend. If, therefore, there
had historically been but one journey of Jesus to Jerusalem, tradi-
tion might bo tempted to create more by degrees, since it would
argue-how could so great a light as Jesus have remained so long
under a busliel, and not rather have early and often placed himself
on the lofty stand which Jerusalem presented? Opponents, too,
might object, like tlie unbelieving brethren of Jesus, (John vii. 3. 4,)
that he who is conscious of tlie power to perform something truly

* Kcbnp.ckftnhurirer. BeitrHa-e S. 207. Comp. Galiler's Treatise on the Resurrection

LOCALITY OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

281

great, does not conceal himself, but seeks publicity, in order that
his capabilities may be recognized; and to these opponents it was
thought the best answer to show tliat Jesus actually did seek such
publicity, and early obtained recognition in an extended spliere.
Out of this representation would easily grow the idea which lies at
the foundation of tlie fourth Gospel, tliat not Galilee, but Judea,
was tlie proper residence of Jesus.

Thus, viewed from the point of tlie possible formation of a legend,
the balance inclines in favour of tlie synoptical writers. But is the
result the same wlien we ascend to tlie relations and designs of Je-
sus, and from tills point of view inquire, if it be more probable tliat
Jesus visited Jerusalem once only or several times during his pub-
lic life?

Tlie alleged difficulty, tliat tlie various journeys to the feasts offer
the principal means of accounting for the intellectual development
of Jesus, is easily removed. For those journeys alone would not
suffice to explain tlie mental pre-eminence of Jesus, and as the main
stress must still be placed on his internal gifts, we cannot pronounce
whether to a mind like his, even Galilee might not present enough
aliment for their maturing; besides, an adherence to tlie synoptical
writers would only oblige us to renounce tliose journeys to tlie feasts
which Jesus took after his public appearance, so tliat lie might still
have been present at many feasts previous to his messianic career,
without assuming a conspicuous character. It lias been held incon-
ceivable tliat Jesus, so long after his assumption of tlie messianic
character, sliould confine himself to Galilee instead of taking his
stand in Judea and Jerusalem, whicli, from tlie higher culture and
more extensive foreign intercourse of tlieir population, were a much
more suitable field for his labours; but it lias been long remarked,
on the other hand, that Jesus could find easier access to the simple
and energetic minds of Galilee, less fettered by priestcraft and Phar-
isaism, and therefore acted judiciously in obtaining a firm footing
there by a protracted ministry, before he ventured to Jerusalem,
where, in the centre of priestly and Pharisaic domination, he must
expect stronger opposition.

Tliere is a graver difficulty in the synoptical statement, consid-
ered in relation to the Mosaic law and Jewish custom.   The law
rigorously required tliat every Israelite should appear before Jehovah
yearly at the three principal feasts (Exod. xxiii. 14 ff.), and the rev-
erence of Jesus for tlie Mosaic institutes (Matt. v. 17 ff.) renders it
improbable tliat, during the wliole course of his ministry, he should
have undertaken but one journey of observance.* Tlie Gospel of
Matthew, however, be our judgment what it may as to tlie date and
place of its composition, did certainly arise in a community of Jew-
ish Christians, who well knew what the law prescribed to the devout
Israelite, and must tlierefore be aware of the contradiction to the law
in which the practice of Jesus was involved, wlien, during a public

282

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

ministry of several years' duration, only one attendance at Jerusalem
was noticed, or (in case tlie synoptical writers supposed but a single
year's ministry, of which we shall speak below) wlien lie was repre-
sented as neglecting two of the great annual feasts.  If, tlien, a
circle in close proximity to Jewish usage found nothing offensive in
the opinion tliat Jesus attended but one feast, may not tins autliority
remove all hesitation on tlic subject from our minds? Besides, on
a more careful weighing of the historical and geographical relations,
the question suggests itself, whether between tlic distant, lialf G-entile
Galileo, and Jerusalem, tlie ecclesiastical bond was so close that the
observance of all tlic feasts could be expected from a Galilean ?
Even according to tlie fourth Gospel, Jesus omitted attending one
Passover tliat occurred in tlie period of Ills public career (John vi. 4).

There is, however, one point unfavourable to tho synoptical
writers.   Tliat Jesus in his last visit to Jerusalem should, within
tlie short space of tlie feast day, have brought himself into sueli de-
cided hostility to tlie ruling party in tlic capital, that they contrived
his arrest and deatli, is inexplicable, if we reject tlie statement of
John, tliat tin's liostility originated and was gradually aggravated
during his frequent previous visits.* If it be rejoined, that even in
Galilcan synagogues there were stationary scribes and phansees
(Matt. ix. 3. xii. 14), tliat such as were resident in tlic capital often
visited the provinces (Matt. xv. 1), and that thus there existed a
hierarchical nexus by means of which a deadly enmity against Jesus
might be propagated in Jerusalem, before he had ever publicly ap-
peared there; we tlicn have precisely that ecclesiastical bond between
Galilee and Jerusalem which renders improbable on tlic part of Je-
sus tlie non-observance of a scries of feasts. Moreover the synop-
tical writers liave recorded an expression of Jesus wliicli tells strongly
against their own view.  The words: Jerusalem, Jerusalem-how
often would I have gathered thy children together-and ye would
not, have no meaning whatever in Luke, who puts them into the
mouth of Jesus before lie had even seen Jerusalem during his public
ministry (xiii. 34); and even from the better arrangement of Mattliew
(xxiii. 37) it is not be understood how Jesus, after a single residence
of a few days in Jerusalem, could found his reproaches on multiplied
efforts to win over its inhabitants to Ins cause. Tills wliole apos-
trophe of Jesus has so original a character, that it is difficult to be-
lieve it incorrectly assigned to him; hence to explain its existence, we
must suppose a series of earlier residences in Jerusalem, such as those
recorded by tlic fourth evangelist.   There is only one resource,-
to pronounce tlic statement of tlic synoptical writers unliistorical in
the particular of limiting the decisive visit of Jesus to Jerusalem to
tlie few days of tlie feast, and to suppose tliat he made a more pro-
tracted stay in the capital.!

It will be seen from the foregoing discussion, wlietlicr, when so
much is to be argued pro and contra, the unhesitating decision of

LOCALITY OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.

283

tlie critics in favour of the fourth evangelist's statement is a just one.
For our own part, we are far from being equally hasty in declaring
for the synoptical writers, and are content to have submitted the
actual state of tlie controversy, as to tlie comparative merit's of John
and the synoptical writers, to farther consideration.

§ 58. THE RESIDENCE OF JESUS AT CAPERNAUM.

DLTJXG the time spent by Jesus in Judea, tlie capital and its
environs recommended themselves as tlie most eligible theatre for
his agency; and we might have conjectured that in like manner
when in Galilee, he would have chosen his native city, Nazareth, as
tlie centre of his labours. Instead of this we find him, when not
travelling, domesticated at Capernaum, as already mentioned; the
synoptical writers designate tills place the ISia TTOAK; of Jesus (Matt.
ix. 1, comp. Mark. ii. 1); here, according to them, was the ol/coc,
which Jesus was accustomed to inhabit, (Mark ii. 1; iii. 20; Matt.
xiii. 1. 36,) probably tliat of Peter (Mark i. 29 ; Matt. viii. 14; xvii.
25 ; Luke iv. 38). In tlie fourth Gospel, which only mentions very
transient visits of Jesus to Galilee, Capernaum is not given as Ilia
dwelling-place, and Cana is tlie place with which he is supposed to
have the most connection. After his baptism he proceeds first to
Cana, (ii. 1) on a special occasion, it is true: after this he makes a
short stay at Capernaum (v. 12); and on his return from his first
attendance at the passovcr, it is again Cana to which lie resorts, and
in wliieli tlie fourth evangelist makes him effect a cure (iv. 46 ft.),
according to the synoptical writers, performed at Capernaum, and
after tills we find him once again in the synagogue at Capernaum
(vi. 59). Tlic most eminent disciples, also, are said by tlie writer
of tlie fourth Gospel, not, as by tlie synoptical writers, to come from
Capernaum, but partly from Cana (xxi. 2) and partly from Beth-
saida (i. 45).  Tlie latter place, even in tlie synoptical gospels, is
mentioned, witli Chorazin, as one iii which Jesus had been pre-emi-
nently active (Matt. xi. 21; Luke x. 13).

Why Jesus chose Capernaum as his central residence in Galilee,
Mark does not attempt to show, but conducts him thither without
comment after his return into Galilee, and the calling of tlie two
pairs of fishermen (i. 21). Matthew (iv. 13 ff.) alleges as a motive,
that an Old Testament prophecy, (Isai. viii. 23 ; ix. 1,) was thereby
fulfilled; a dogmatical motive, and therefore of no historical value.
Luke thinks lie lias found tlie reason in a fact, which is more worthy
of notice. According to him, Jesus after his return from baptism
does not immediately take up his residence in Capernaum, but makes
an essay to teach in Nazareth, and after its failure first turns to Ca-
pernaum. This evangelist tells us in tlie most graphic style, how
Jesus presented himself at tlie synagogue on the sabbath-day, and
expounded a prophetic passage, so as to excite general admiration,
but at tlie same time to rirovol.:!--, mnHfImia Toflo,.i-;^a ^" +i." ^-.--

284 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

circumstances of .his family. Jesus, in reply, is made to refer the

discontent of the Nazarenes, that he performed no miracles before
them as at Capernaum, to the contempt which every prophet meets
•with in his own country, and to threaten them in Old Testament
allusions, that the divine benefits would be withdrawn from them
and conferred on strangers. Exasperated by tills, they lead him to
the brow of the liill, intending to cast him down: he, however,
passes unhurt through the midst of them (iv. 16-30).

Both the other synoptical writers are acquainted witli a visit of
Jesus to Nazareth ; but they transfer it to a much later period, when
Jesus had been long labouring in Galileo, and resident in Capernaum
(Matt. xiii. 54 ff.; Mark vi. 1 ff.). To reconcile their narrative with
that of Luke, it has been customary to suppose that Jesus, notwith-
standing his first rough reception, as described by Luke, wislied to
make one more experiment whether his long absence and subse-
quent fame might not liave altered the opinion of the Nazarenes-
an opinion worthy of a petty town; but the result was equally un-
favourable.* Tlie two scenes, liowever, are too similar to be pre-
vented from mingling witli each oilier. In botli instances the teach-
ing of Jesus in the synagogue makes the same impression on the
Nazarenes,-that of amazement at tlie wisdom of tlie carpenter's
son (Luke only giving more details); in both instances there is a
lack of miracles on the part of Jesus, the first two evangelists pre-
senting more prominently its cause; namely, the unbelief of the Naz-
arenes, and the third dwelling more on its unfavourable effect; lastly,
in botli instances, Jesus delivers the maxim (tlie result of his expe-
rience), that a prophet is the least esteemed in his own country; and
to tills Luke appends a more ample discourse, which irritates the
Nazarenes to attempt an act of violence, unnoticed by the oilier
evangelists. But tlie fact which most decisively shows tliat tlie two
narratives cannot exist in each other's presence, is that they both
claim to relate the first incident of tlie kind ;f for in both, the Naz-
arenes express their astonishment at the suddenly revealed intellect-
ual gifts of Jesus, wliicli they could not at once reconcile with Ills
known condition.f Tlie first supposition that presents itself is, that
the scene described by Luke preceded tliat of Matthew and Mark;

but if so, tlie Nazarenes could not wonder a second time and inquire,
whence hath this man this wisdom ? since they must have had proof
on tliat point on the first occasion; if, on tlie contrary, we try to
give the later date to Luke's incident, it appears unnatural, for tlie
same reason that they should wonder at the gracious words 'which
proceeded out of his mouth, neither could Jesus well say, This day
is this scripture fulfilled in, your ears, without severely reflecting
on their former insensibility, which had retarded tliat fulfilment.

These considerations have led tlie majority of modern commen-

* Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, 6, S. 403. t Tins Schleiermachcr has made evident, uber
den Luhas, S. 63.  \ Sieffert, fiber den Ursprung des ersten kanonischen Evangeliums,
S- 89-

LOCALITY OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.        285

tators to the opinion, that Luke and the other synoptical evangelists
have here given the same history, merely differing in the date, and
in the colouring of the facts ;* and the only question among them is,
which of the two narrations deserves the preference. With respect
to the date, that of Luke seems, at tlie first glance, to have the ad-
vantage ; it gives tlie desiderated motive for the change of residence,
and the wonder of the Nazarenes appears most natural on the sup-
position that then he first assumed the function of a public teacher;

hence Matthew's divergency from Luke has been recently made a
serious reproach to him, as a chronological error, f But there is one
particular in all tlie three narratives which is an obstacle to our re-
ferring the incident to so early a period. If Jesus presented him-
self thus at Nazareth before he liad made Capernaum the principal
theatre of his agency, the Nazarenes could not utter the words which
Jesus imputes to them in Luke: Whatsoever we have heard done
in Capernaum, do also here in thy country ; nor could they, ac-
cording to Matthew and Mark, be astonished at the- mighty works
of Jesus,} for as he performed few if any miracles at Nazareth, that
expression, nothwithstanding its perplexing connection with the
aocfi'ia, the wisdom,, manifested in tliat city, must refer to woi'ks per-
formed elsewlierc. If, then, tlie Nazarenes wondered at the deeds
of Jesus at Capernaum, or were jealous of the distinction conferred
on that city, Jesus must have previously resided there, and could
not have proceeded thither for tlie first time in consequence of the
scene at Nazareth. From this, it is plain that the later chronologi-
cal position of the narrative is the original one, and that Luke, in
placing it earlier, out of mere conjecture, was honest or careless
enough to retain the mention of the wonders at Capernaum, though
only consistent with the later position.§ If, with regard to the date
of the incident, the advantage is tlius on the side of Matthew and
Mark, we are left in darkness as to the motive wliich led Jesus to
alter his abode from Nazareth to Capernaum; unless the circum-
stance that some of his most confidential disciples had their home
there, and the more extensive frame of the place, may be regarded
as inducements to the measure.

The fullness .and particularity of Luke's description of the scene,
contrasted with tlie summary style in which it is given by the other
two evangelists, has generally won for the former tlie praise of su-
perior accuracy.!] Let us look more closely, and we shall find that
the greater particularity of Luke shows itself chiefly in this, that he
is not satisfied with a merely general mention of the discourse de-
livered by Jesus in the synagogue, but cites tlie Old Testament
passage on which he enlarged, and the commencement of its appli-
cation. Tlie passage is from Isai. Ixi. 1, 2, where the prophet an-

* Olshausen, Fritzsche, in loc. Hase, Leben Jesu, § 62. Sieffert, ut supra.
t Sieffert, ut supra. \ What these, rn'igihy works were can only be made clear when
we come to the chapter on the Miracles.

286

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

nounces the return from exile, with the exception of the words to
set at liberty t/iem. that are bruised, aTroarEUai. TeOpavauevov^ ev
d(j)K<Jsi^ which arc from Isai. Iviii. 6.  To this passage Jesua gives
a messianic interpretation, for lie declares it to be fulfilled by his
appearance.  Wliy lie selected this text from among all others lias
been variously conjectured.  It is known that among the Jews at
a later period, certain extracts from tlic Thorah and tlie Prophets
were statedly read on particular sabbaths and feast days, and it has
hence been suggested tliat tlie above passage was tlie selection ap-
pointed for tlie occasion in question. It is true that the cliapter
from wliicli tlie words d^offTeUat K. T. X. are taken, used to be read
on tlie great day of atonement, and Bengel lias made the supposi-
tion, tliat tlie scene we are considering occurred on tliat day, a main
pillar of his evangelical chronology.* But if Jesus liad adhered to
the regular course of reading, he would not merely have extracted
from tlie lesson appointed for this feast a few stray words, to insert
them in a totally disconnected passage; and after all, it is impos-
sible to demonstrate tliat, so early as the time of Jesus, there were
prescribed readings, even from tlie prophets, f If then Jesus was
not tlius circumstantially directed to the passage cited, did he open.
upon it designedly or fortuitously? Many imagine him turning over
the leaves until he found the text which was in his mind :\ but Ols-
liauscn is right in saying tliat tlie words dvanrv^ac; TO fti.ftX'wv si'ps
rbv TOTTOV do not imply that he found tlie passage after searching for
it, but that he aliglited on it under the guidance of the Divine Spirit.§
This, however, is but a poor contrivance, to liide the improbability,
that Jesus should fortuitously open on a passage so well adapted to
serve as a motto for his first messianic enterprize, behind an appeal
to tlie Spirit, as deus ex mac/iiiza. Jesus might very likely have
quoted tills text witli reference to himself, and tlius it would remain
in tlie minds of tlic evangelists as a prophecy fulfilled in Jesus;

Matthew would probably have introduced it in his own person with
Ills usual form, Iva TrATjpuOy, and would have said that Jesus had
now begun his messianic annunciation, Kripvy^a, that tlie prophecy
Isai, Ixi. 1 ft. might be fulfilled ; but Luke, who is less partial to
this form, or the tradition whence lie drew his materials, puts tlie
words into tlie mouth of Jesus on his first messianic appearance,
very judiciously, it is true, but, owing to the chances wliicli it is
necessary to suppose, less probably; so that I am more inclined to
be satisfied with tlic indefinite statement of Mattliew and Mark.
The other point in which tlie description of Luke merits the praise
of particularity, is his dramatic picture of tlie tumultuary closing
scene; but this scene perplexes even those wlio on the wliole give
the preference to his narrative. It is not to be concealed that the
extremely violent expulsion of Jesus by tlie Nazarenes, seems to
have liad no adequate provocation ;|| and we cannot, witli Schleier-

CHRONOLOGY OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OP JESUS.

287

macher,* expunge the notion that the life of Jesus was threatened,
without imputing to the writer a false addition of the words etc; TO
Karaicprj^vioal av-bv (v. 29.), and thus materially affecting tlie cre-
dibility of liis entire narration. But tlie still more remarkable clause,
SieXOw 6ia fieaov avr&v enopsveTo (v. 30), is tlie main difficulty. It
is not to be explained (at least not in accordance witli the evange-
list's view) as an effect merely of the commanding glance of Jesus,
as Hase supposes; and Olsliausen is again right wlien lie says, that
tlie evangelist intended to signify that Jesus passed unharmed through
the midst of his furious enemies, because his divine power fettered
their senses and limbs, because his hour was not yet come ('John
viii. 20), and because no man could take his life from him until he
himself laid it down (John x. 18).f Here again we have a display
of the glorifying tendency of tradition, wliicli loved to represent
Jesus as one defended from his enemies, like Lot (Gen. <:ix. 11), or
Elisha (2 Kings vi. 18), by a, heavenly hand, or better still, by the
power of his own superior nature; unless there be supposed in this
case, as in the two examples from the Old Testament, a temporary
infliction of blindness, an illudere per caliginem, tlie idea of which
Tertullian reprobates, t Thus in tins instance also, tlie less im-
posing account of the first two evangelists is to be preferred, namely
that Jesus, impeded from further activity by the unbelief of the
Nazarenes, voluntarily forsook his ungrateful paternal city.

§. 59. DIVERGENCIES OF THE EVANGELISTS AS TO THE CHRONOLOGY
OF THE LIFE OF JESUS--DURATION OF HIS PUBLIC MINISTRY.

IN considering the chronology of the public life of Jesus, we
must distinguish tlie question of its total duration, from that of the

arrangement of its particular events.
' Not one of our evanglists expressly tells us how long the public
ministry of Jesus lasted; but wliile the synoptical writers give us
no clue to a decision on the subject, we find in John certain data,
which seem to warrant one. In the synoptical gospels there is no
intimation how long after the baptism of Jesus his imprisonment
and death occurred; nowhere are months and years distinguished;

and though it is once or twice said: ^s0' ^spac; 'eS; or 6vo (Matt. xvii.
1; xx\*i. 2), tliese isolated fixed points furnish us witli no guidance
in a sea of general uncertainty. On the contrary, tlie many journeys
to tlie feasts by which the narrative of tlie fourth evangelist is dis-
tinguished 'from that of his predecessors, furnishes us, so to speak,
with chronological abutments, as for each appearance of Jesus, at
one of tliese annual feasts, the Passover especially, we must, deduct-
ing the first, reckon a full year of his ministry. We have, in tlie
fourth Gospel, after the baptism of Jesus, and apparently at a short
interval (comp. i. 29, 35, 44; ii. 1, 12), a passover attended by him

• Ueber den Lukas. S-9S.  + TTt .nn-a .170. ^™^ o - an   •<• i a- -r  •

288

THE LIFE OP JESUS.

(ii. 13). But the next feast visited by Jesus (v. 1.) which is indefi-
nitely designated a feast of the Jews, has been the perpetual crux
of New Testament chronologi.sts. It is only important in deter-
mining tlie duration of the public life of Jesus, on the supposition
that it was a passover; for in this case it would mark the close of
his first year's ministry. We grant that fj eop-?) ruv 'lovSaluv, THE
feast of the Jews, might very probably denote tlie passover, which
was pre-eminent among their institutions ;* but it happens that the
best manuscripts have in the present passage no article, and without
it, tlie above expression can only signify indefinitely one of the Jew-
ish feasts, which tlie author thought it immaterial to specify, f Thus
intrinsically it might mean either the feast of Pentecost,:): Purim,§
the Passover, 1] or any other ^ but in its actual connection it is evi-
dently not intended by the narrator to imply the Passover, both
because he would hardly have glanced thus slightly at the most im-
portant of all tlie feasts, and because, vi. 4, there comes another
Passover, so that on the supposition we are contesting, he would
have passed in silence over a whole year between v. 47, and vi. 1,
For to give tlio words fjv de eyyvg TO Trda^a (vi. 4), a retrospective
meaning, is too artificial an expedient of Paulus, since, as he him-
self confesses,** this phrase, elsewhere in John, is invariably used
with reference to the immediately approaching feast (ii. 13; vii. 2;

xi. 55), and must from its nature have a prospective meaning, un-
less the context indicate the contrary. Thus not until John vi. 4,
do we meet with the second passover, and to this it is not mentioned.
that Jesus resorted, ff Tlicn follow the feast of Tabernacles and that
of tlie Dedication, and afterwards, xi. 55. xii. 1, the last passover
visited by Jesus. According to our view of John v. 1, and vi. 4,
therefore, we obtain two years for the public ministry of Jesus, be-
sides the interval between his baptism and the first Passover. The
same result is found by tliose who, with Paulus, hold the feast
mentioned, v. 1, to be a passover, but vi. 4, only a retrospective
allusion; whereas the ancient Fathers of the Church, reckoning a
separate passover to eacli of the passages in question, made out
three years. Meanwhile, by this calculation, we only get the mini-
mum duration of the public ministry of Jesus possible according to
the fourth Gospel, for the writer nowhere intimates that he has
been punctilious in naming every feast that fell witliin that minis-
try, including those not observed by Jesus, neitlier, unless we re-
gard it as established that the writer was the apostle John, have we
any guarantee that lie knew the entire number.

It may be urged in opposition to the calculations, built on the
representations of John, that the synoptical writers give no reasons

* Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, B. S. 788 f. f Liicke, Comm. zum Evang. Job. 2, S. 6.
t Bengel, ordo temporum, p. 219 f. § Hug, Einl. in da3 N. T. 2, S. 228 ff. || Paulus,
Comm. zum Ev. Joh. S. 279 f. Exeg. Handb. 1, B. 784: ff. ^[ Summaries of the different
opinions are given by Hase, L. J. § 53 ; and by Lucke, Comm. zum Ev. Joh., 2, S. 2 ff.
** T'-^/- TI,.-.^!. i T> o TO,"   J-J. c^ c^n^w iihttr ripn Zwpck der evana;. Cresch. und

CHRONOLOGY OP THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.      289

for limiting the term of the public ministry of Jesus to a single
year :* but this objection rests on a supposition borrowed from John
himself, namely, that Jesus, Galilean though lie was, made it a rule
to attend every Passover: a supposition, again, wliich is overturned
by the same writer's own representation. According to him, Jesus
left unobserved the passover mentioned vi. 4, for from vi. 1, where
Jesus is on the cast side of tlie sea of Tiberias, through vi. 17 and
59, where he goes to Capernaum, and vii. 1, where lie frequents
Galilee, in order to avoid the Jews, to vii. 2 and 10, where he pro-
ceeds to Jerusalem on occasion of the Feast of Tabernacles, tlie
Evangelist's narrative is so closely consecutive that a journey to the
Passover can nowhere be inserted. Out of tlie synoptical gospels,
by themselves, we gather nothing as to the length of tlie public
ministry of Jesus, for this representation admits of our assigning
him either several years of activity, or only one; their restriction
of his intercourse with Jerusalem to his final journey being the sole
point in wliich tlicy control our conclusion. It is true that several
Fathers of the Church, f as well as some heretics,:}: speak of tlie
ministry of Jesus as having lasted but a single year; but that the
source of tills opinion was not tlie absence of early journeys to the
feasts in tlie synoptical gospels, but an entirely fortuitous associa-
tion, we learn from those Fathers themselves, for they derive it from
tlie prophetic passage Isai. Ixi. 1 f. applied by Jesus (Luke iv.) to
himself. In tills passage there is mention of the acceptable year
of the Lord, eviavrbi; Kvpiov de/c-o?, which the prophet or, according
to tlie evangelical interpretation, tlie Messiah is sent to announce.
Understanding tins phrase in its strict chronological sense, they
adopted from it the notion of a single messianic year, which was
more easily reconcileable witli tlie synoptical gospels than with that
of John, after whose statement the calculation of the church soon
came to be regulated.

In striking contrast with tills lowest computation of time, is the
tradition, also very ancient, that Jesus was baptized in his thirtieth
year, but at tlie time of his crucifixion was not far from his fiftieth.§
But this opinion is equally founded on a misunderstanding.  The
elders who had conversations with John the disciple of the Lord,
in Asia, rrpeopvrepot ol Kara rtfv 'A-aiav 'ludvvy rw TOV K.vpiov fia-
erj-y avfi^eftXi]ii6rEi;,-on whose testimony Irena?us relies when lie
Says, such is the tradition of John, TrapaSeSuKKVal ravra TOV 'ludv-
vi]v,-had given no information further than tliat Christ taught,
cetatem seniorem habens. That this cetas senior was tlie age of from
forty to fifty years is merely the inference of Irenaius, founded oil
what tlie Jews allege as an objection to tlie discourse of Jesus, John
viii. 57: Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen

* Winer, bibl. Realworterbuch I, S. 6GG. f Clem. Alex. Stromat. 1, p. 174 Wurzb.
ed., 340 Sylburg ; Orig. de principp. iv. 5, comp. homil. in Luc. 32.   { Iren. adv. hair.
i. 1, a. ii. 33, 38, on the Valentinians. Clem. horn. xvii. 19. § Iren. ii. xxii. 5 {. Comp.

292

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

makes nearly cotemporary with. the feeding of tlie five thousand.
Here, however, the points of contact between this evangelist and
his predecessors are at an end, until we come to the last journey of
Jesus ; and if they are too uncertain to promise even a simple divis-
ion of the synoptical materials by the two passovera, how can we
hope, by the journeys of Jesns to the feast of the Jews, eoprf] T&V
'lovoawv, to the Feast of Tabernacles, or to tlie Feast of Dedication,
if that be a separate journey, to classify chronologically tlie uninter-
rupted series of Galilean occurences in the first three gospels ? Never-
theless tills lias been attempted by a succession of theologians down
to the present time, with an expenditure of acumen and erudition,
worthy of a more fertile subject :* but unprejudiced judges have de-
cided, that as the narrative of the first three evangelists lias scarcely
any elements that can give certitude to such a classification, not one
of tlie harmonies of the gospels yet written has any claim to be con-
sidered anything more than a tissue of historical conjcctures.f

It remains to estimate tlie chronological value of the synoptical
writers, apart from John. They are so frequently at variance witli
each other in the order of events, and it is so seldom tliat one lias
all the probabilities on his side, that each of them may be convicted
of numerous chronological errors, which must undermine our confi-
dence in his accuracy. It has been maintained tliat, in the compo-
sition of their books, they meditated no precise chronological ordei-4
and this is partially confirmed by their mode of narration. Through-
out the interval between tlie baptism of Jesus and the history of the
Passion, their narratives resemble a collection of anecdotes, strung
together mostly on a thread of mere analogy and association of ideas.
But there is a distinction to be made in reference to the above opin-
ion. It is true tliat from tlie purport of their narratives, and the
indecisiveness and uniformity of their connecting phrases, we can
detect their want of insight into the more accurate chronological re-
lations of what they record; but that the authors flattered them-
selves they were giving a chronological narration, is evident from
those very connecting phrases, which, however indecisive, have al-
most always a chronological character, such as na-ra^mri dm TOV
opovf, Trapdyuv EKelOev, ravro, avrov XaXovv-og, ev avTy ry ffiJ-fpf, "wre,
Kdl ISov, &c.§

The incidents and discourses detailed by Jolin are, for the most
part, peculiar to himself; he is therefore not liable to the same con-
trol in his chronology from independent authors, as are the synop-
tical writers from each other; neither is his narration wanting in
connectedness and sequence. Hence our decision on the merits oi
his chronological order is dependent on the answer to tlie following

* See especially the labours of Paulus in the Chronological Excursus of his Commen-
tary and his exegetical Manual; of Hug, in the Einl. z, N. T. 2. S, 2, 233 ff,; and others,
given by Winer in his bibl> Eealworterbuch 1, S. 067. •)• Winer, ut sup,; comp. Kaiser,
btblische Theologie, 1 S* 2ol» Anm ; die Abhandlung uber die verschiedenen Kueksichtcn

JESUS AS THE MESSIAH.

293

question: Is the development and progress of the cause and plan of
Jesus, as given by tlie fourth evangelist, credible in itself and on
comparison with available data, drawn from the other Gospels ? The
solution to tills question is involved in the succeeding inquiry.