

CHAPTER YII.

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

§ 80. COXVEESATION OF JESUS WITH NICODEMUS.

THE first considerable specimen wliicli tlic fourth Gospel gives
of tlic tcacliing of Jesua, is his conversation with Nicodemus (iii.
1-21.). In the previous chapter (23-25.) it is narrated, that
during the first passovcr attended by Jesus after his entrance on his
public ministry, he liad won many to faith in him by tlic miracles,
cr]iis~ia, which lie performed, but tliat he did not commit himself to
them because lie saw through them: lie was aware, that is, of the
uncertainty and impurity of their faith. Then follows in our present
chapter, as an example, not only of tlie adherents whom Jesus liad
found even tlius early, but also of tlie wariness witli wliicli lie tested
and received them, a more detailed account how Nicodemus, a ruler
of tlie Jews and a Pharisee, applied to him, and how lie was treated
by Jesus.

It is through tlie Gospel of John alone tliat we learn anything
of this Nicodemus, wlio in vii. 50 f. appears as the advocate of Je-
sus, so far as to protest against his being condemned without a hear-
ing, and in xix. 39. as tlie partaker witli Joseph of Arimathca of tlie
care of interring Jesus. Modern criticism, witli reason, considers it
surprising tliat Matthew (witli tlic other synoptists) does not even
mention tlie name of tills remarkable adherent of Jesus, and tliat we
have to gather all our knowledge of him from tlie fourth Gospel;

since the peculiar relation in wliicli Nicodemus stood to Jesus, and
Ills participation in tlic care of his interment, must have been as well
known to Matthew as to John.  This difficulty lias been numbered
among tlic arguments wliicli are thought to prove tliat tlic first Gospel
was not written by tlie apostle Mattlicw, but was tlie product of a
tradition considerably more remote from tlie time and locality of Je-
sus.* But tlic fact is tliat tlic common fund of tradition on which

DISCOUESES OF JESUS IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

395

all tlie synoptists drew had preserved no notice of this Nicodemus.
With touching piety tlic Christian legend has recorded in tlic tablets
of her memory, tlie names of all tlie others wlio helped to render the
last honours to their murdered master-of Joseph of Arhnathea and
tlie two Marys (Matt. xxvii. 56-61 parall.); wliy then was Nico-
demus tile only neglected one-he who was especially distinguished
among those who tended tlie remains of Jesus, by his nocturnal in-
terview witli the teacher sent from God, and by his advocacy of him
among tlic chief priests and Pharisees ? It is so difficult to conceive
that the name of this man, if lie had really assumed such a position,
would have vanished from the popular evangelical tradition, without
leaving a single trace, that one is induced to inquire whether tlie
contrary supposition be not more capable of explanation : namelv,
that such a relation between Nicodemus and Jesus might have hccn
fabricated by tradition, and adopted by the author of the fourth
Gospel without having really subsisted.

John xii. 42, it is expressly said tliat many among the chief
rulers believed on Jesus, but concealed their faitli from dread of ex-
communication by tlie Pharisees, because they loved the praise, of
inen more than the praise of God* Tliat towards the end of his
career many people of rank believed in Jesus, even in secret only,
is not very probable, since no indication of it appears in tlic Acts of
tlie Apostles; for tliat the advice of Gamaliel (Acts v. 34 ff.) did
not originate in a positively favourable disposition towards tlie cause
of Jesus, seems to be sufficiently demonstrated by the spirit of his
disciple Saul. Moreover tlic synoptists make Jesus declare in plain
terms tliat tlie secret of his Mcssiahship liad been revealed only to
babes, and hidden from the wise and prudent (Matt. xi. 25; Luke
x. 21.), and Joseph ofArimathea is tlie only individual of tlie ruling
class whom they mention as an adherent of Jesus.  How, then, if
Jesus did not really attach to himself any from tlie upper ranks, canic
tlie case to be represented differently at a later period ? In John
vii. 48 f. we read tliat the Pharisees sought to disparage Jesus by
tlie remark that none of tlic rulers or of the Pharisees, but only the
ignorant populace, believed on him ; and even later adversaries of
Christianity, for example, Celsus, laid great stress on tlie circum-
stance tliat Jesus liad liad as his disciples e-r(pp/;-ovc dvOpuTrovf;, reA-
6va<; KO.I vavraq -w^ -Tovr]po-d~ovc.1[  Tills reproach was a thorn in
tlie side of tlie early church, and though as long as licr members
were drawn only from the people, slic might reflect with satisfaction
on tlie declarations of Jesus, in wliicli he liad pronounced the poor,
-r-u^ov^, and simple, vi]'nlov(;, blessed: yet so soon as she was joined
by men of rank and education, these would lean to the idea. tliat con-

* This "secret information" is very welcome to Dr. Paulas, because it gives a useful
hint "as to many occurrences in the life of Jesus, tlie causes of which are not obvious"
(L. J. 1. B. S. 141): that is, Paulus, like Bahrdt and Venturini, thous-a less openly, is
fond of using such secret and influential allies as dws ex machina^ for the explanation of
much that is miraculous in tlie life of Jesus (the transli^uration, residence after the resur-

396

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

verts like themselves had not been wanting to Jesus during his life.
But, it would be objected, nothing had been liitlierto known of such
converts. Naturally enough, it might be answered; since fear of
tlieir equals would induce them to conceal their relations with Jesus.
Thus a door was opened for the admission of any number of secret
adherents among tlie higher class (John xil. 42 f.). But, it would
be farther urged, how could they have intercourse with Jesus, unob-
served ? Under the veil of the night, would be the answer; and
thus the scene was laid for tlie interviews of such men witli Jesus
(xix. 39.). This, however, would not suffice; a representative of
this class must actually appear on the scene: Josepli of Arimathea
might have been chosen, his name being still extant in the synoptical
tradition; but the idea of him was too definite, and it was tlie interest
of the legend to name more than one eminent friend of Jesus. Hence
a new personage was devised, whose Greek name NtKod^o? seems
to point him out significantly as tlie representative of tlie dominant
class.* That tills development of tlie legend is confined to tlie fourth
Gospel, is to be explained, partly by tlie generally admitted lateness
of its origin, and partly on tlie ground that in tlie evidently more
cultivated circle in which it arose, the limitation of the adherents of
Jesus to tlie common people would be more offensive, than in the
circle in which tlie synoptical tradition was formed. Thus tlie re-
proach which modern criticism lias cast on the first Gospel, on the
score of its silence respecting Nicodemus, is turned upon tlie fourth,
on tlie score of its information on the same subject.

Tliese considerations, however, should not create any prejudice
against tlie ensuing conversation, which is the proper object of our
investigations. This may still be in the main genuine; Jesus may
have held such a conversation with one of his adherents, and our
evangelist may have embellished it no further than by making this
interlocutor a man of rank. Neither will we, with the author of tlie
Probabilia, take umbrage at tlie opening address of Nicodemus, nor
complain, with him, that there is a want of connexion between that
address and the answer of Jesus.f Tlie requisition of a new birth
('yevvrjOrjval avuOevY as a condition of entrance into tlie kingdom of
heaven, does not differ essentially from tlie summons with wliicli
Jesus opens his ministry in the synoptical gospels, liepent ye, for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand. New birth, or new creation,
was a current image among tlie Jews, especially as denoting the
conversion of an idolater into a worshipper of Jehovah. It was

* Let the reader bear in mind the kindred names Kicolans and Nicolaitans.

•{• Prob. p. 44. Bretsclmcider is right, however, in declaring against KuiiK'il's method
of supplying a connexion between tlie discourses in John, by the insertion of propositions
and intermediate discourses supposed to have been omitted. Liicke judiciously admits (1,
p. 446) tliat if, in John, something appears to be wanting between two consecutive ex-
pressions of Jesus, we are yet to suppose that there was an immediate connexion between
them in the mind of the evangelist, and it is this connexion which it is tlie task of exegesis
to ascertain. In truth the discourses in tlie 4th Gospel are never entirely wanting in con-
nexion (apart from the exceptions to be noticed § 81), though that connexion is some-

DISCOUKSES OF JESUS IN THE FOUETH GOSPEL.

397

customary to say of Abraham, that when, according to the Jewish
supposition, lie renounced idolatry for the worship of the true God,
he became a new creature (t-ttmn n"i")S)-* The proselyte, too, in
allusion to his relinquishing all his previous associations, was com-
pared to a new-born child, f Tliat such phraseology was common
among the Jews at tliat period, is shown by the confidence with
wliicli Paul applies, as if it required no explanation, the term new
creation, naiv'q /ci-tfftc, to tliose truly converted to Christ. Now, if
Jesus required, even from tlie Jews, aa a condition of entrance into
tlie messianic kingdom, the new birth which they ascribed to then-
heathen proselytes, Nicodemus might naturally wonder at tlie requi-
sition, since the Israelite thought himself, as such, unconditionally
entitled to tliat kingdom: and tills is the construction which has
been put upon his question v. 44 But Nicodemus does not ask,
How canst thou say tliat a Jew, or a child of Abraham, must be
born again ? His ground of wonder is that Jesus appears to suppose
it possible for a man to be born again, and tliat when he is old.
It docs not, therefore, astonish him that spiritual new birth should
be expected in a Jew, but corporeal new birth in a man. How an
oriental, to whom figurative speecli in general-how a Jew, to whom
tlie image of tlie new birth in particular must have been familiar-
liow especially a master of Israel, in whom tlie misconstruction of
figurative phrases cannot, as in tlie Apostles (e. g. Matt. xv. 15 f. ;

xvi. 7.), be ascribed to want of education-could understand this
expression literally, has been matter of extreme surprise to exposi-
tors of all parties, as well as to Jesus (v. 10). Hence some have
supposed that the Pharisee really understood Jesus, and only in-
tended by his question to test tlie ability of Jesus to interpret his
figurative expression into a simple proposition :§ but Jesus does not
treat him as a hypocrite, as in tliat case lie must have done-he
continues to instruct him, as one really ignorant ov 'yivwaKovra
(v. 10). Others give tlie question the following turn: This cannot
be meant in a physical sense, how then otherwise ? || But the true
drift of the question is rather the contrary: By these words I can
only understand physical new birth, but how is this possible ? Our
wonder at tlie ignorance of the Jewisli doctor, therefore, returns
upon us ; and it is heightened when, after tlie copious explanation
ot Jesus (v. 5-8.), tliat tlie new birth which he required was a
spiritual birth, ysvv^Ofjval KK. ~ov wei^ua-oc, Nicodemus lias made
no advance in comprehension, but asks with tlie same obtuseness
as before (v. 9.), llow can these, things be ? By this last difficulty
Liicke is so straitened, that, contrary to his 'ordinary exegetical
tact, he refers tlie continued amazement of Nicodemus, (as other
expositors liad referred his original question,) to tlie circumstance

* Bcreschith E. sect. 30 f. xxxviii. 2. Bamimdbar E. S. 11 f. ccxi. 2 Tanchuma f. v.
2, in Schottgen, i. S. 704. Something similar is said of Moses, from Schemoth E. ib.
t Jevamoth f. Ixii. 1. xcii. 1, in Lighttbot, p. 984,   f. E. g. Knapp, Comm. in colloq.
Christi cum Nicod. in loc. g Paulus, Comm. 4, S. 183. L. J. 1, a. S. 176. |1 Lucke and

398

THE LIFE OP JESUS.

tliat Jesus maintained tlie necessity of new birth even for Israelites.
But, in tliat case, Nicodomus would have inquired concerning the
necessity, not the possibility, of tliat Lirtli; instead of asking, How
can these tilings be ? lie would have asked, W/'u/ mvst these thing's
be? Tills inconcclvaLle mistake in a Jewish doctor is not tlion to
be explained away, and our surprise must become strong suspicion
so soon as it can be shown, tliat legend or tlie evangelist Iiad in-
ducements to represent tills individual as more simple than lie really
was.  First, tlicn, it must occur to us, tliat in all descriptions and
recitals, contrasts are eagerly exhibited; hence in the representation
of a colloquy in which one party is the teacher, tlie oilier tlic taught,
there is a strong temptation to create a contrast to tlie wisdom of
tlic former, by exaggerating tlie simplicity of tlie latter.  Further,
we must remember tlie satisfaction it must give to a Christian mind
of tliat age, to place a master of Israel in tlie position of an unin-
telllo-ent person, bv tlic side of tlic Master of tlie Christians. Lastly
it is, as we sliall presently see. more clearly, tlie constant method
of the fourth evangelist in detailing the conversations of Jesus, to
form tlie knot and tlie progress of tlie discussion, by making tlie
interlocutors understand literally wliat Jesus intended figuratively.

In repiv to tlie second query of Nicodemus, Jesus takes entirely
tlic tone of tlic fourth evangelist's prologue (v. 11-13*).   The
Question hence arises, whether tlie evangelist Lorrowed from Jesus,
or lent to him hid own style. A previous investigation lias decided
in favour of tlie latter alternative, f But tills inquiry referred merely
to the form of the discourses ; in relation to their matter, its analogy
with tlic ideas of Pliilo, does not authorize us at once to conclude
that the writer here puts his Alexandrian doctrine of tlic Logos into
tlie mouth of Jesus 4 because the expressions, JF<3 speak that zee
do know, &c. o oiSafiEv AO/.OV^EV ic. - /L, and, JVoman hath ascended
up to heaven, &c. ovSei^ dvaft^'cev K. r. >,., have an analogy with
Matt. xi. 27.; and tlic idea of the prc-existcncc of tlie Messiah
which is here propounded, is, as we have seen, not foreign to the
apostle Paul.

V. 14 and 15 Jesus proceeds from the more simple things of the
earth, i-riyuol^ tlic communications concerning tlic new birth, to
tlie more difficult tilings of heaven, e-rorpanotc, tlie announcement
of the destination of tlie Mcssiali to a vicarious death.  The Son
of Man, lie says, must be lifted vp {v^wOqvat, which, in John's
phraseology, signincs crucifixion, with an allusion to a glorifying
exaltation)', in tlic same way, and witli tlie same effect, as tlie brazen
serpent .Numb. xxi. 8, 9. Here many questions press upon us.
Is it credible, tliat Jesus already, at tlic very commencement of his

* III. 11: 6 mpunap.FV izaprvpovfttv    I. 18 : •9cbv oi(idf eupaKe TTUCTTC- b l^ovo-
ica}. Tijv iiapruftiav r/^dv ov '/.a^uvtrs.   13: yeviic vioc, o iiv el{ ruv noinuv TOV irarpof,
Kal ovSeic: uvai-Sifh/KfV (•(f Tor tii-pavuv, cl w iKflvof c^riffiaaTO.
6 SK TOV ovpavov icara,3nf, o vlo{ TOV u.v9fiu-    11: -Kill ol Uwi avrov ov TfopsAafiw.

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IX THE FOURTH GOSPEL.      399

public ministry, foresaw his death, and. in the specific form of

crucifixion ? and tliat long before he instructed his disciples on this
point, he. made a communication on the subject to a Pharisee? Can
it be held consistent with tlie wisdom of Jesus as a teacher, that. he,
should impart such knowledge to Nicodcmus ? Even Lucke* puts
the question wliy, when Nicodemus Iiad not understood the more
obvious doctrine, Jesus tormented him with the more recondite, and
especially with the secret of tlie Messiah's deatli, which was then
so remote ? He answers: it accords perfectly witli the wisdom of
Jesus as a teacher, tliat lie should reveal tlie sufferings appointed
for him by God as early as possible, because no instruction was
better adapted to cast down false worldly liopes. But tlie more
remote tlie idea of tlie Messiah's deatli from tlie conceptions of his
cotemporaries, owing to tlic worldliness of their expectations, the
more impressively and unequivocally must Jesus express tliat idea,
if he wished to promulgate it; not in an enigmatical form which he
could not be sure tliat Nicodcmus would understand. Lucke con-
tinues : Nicodcmus was a man open to instruction; one of whom
good might be expected. But in this very conversation, his dulncss
of comprehension in earthly things, KTiyua, had evinced tliat he
must have still less capacity for heavenly things, enovpdvia: and,
according to v. 12, Jesus himself despaired of enlightening liirn with
respect to them.  Lucke, however, observes, that it was a practice
witli Jesus to follow up easy doctrine which had not been compre-
hended, by difficult doctrine which was of course less compre-
hensible; thai he purposed thus to give a spur to tlie minds of his
hearers, and by straining their attention, engage them to reflect.
But tlie examples which Lucke adduces of such proceeding on the
part of Jesus, are all drawn from tlie fourth gospel.  Now tlie very
point in question is, whether tliat gospel correctly represents tlie
teaching of Jesus; consequently Liicke argues in a circle. We
have seen a similar procedure ascribed to Jesus in his conversation
with tlie woman of Samaria, and we have already declared our
opinion that such an overburthening of weak faculties witli enigma
on enigma, does not accord with tlie wise rule as to the communi-
cation of doctrine, which tlie same gospel puts into the mouth of
Jesus, xvi. 12. It would not stimulate, but confuse, the mind of
tlie hearer, who persisted in a misapprehension of tlie well-known
figure of tlie new birth, to present to him the novel comparison of
the Messiah and his deatli, to the brazen serpent and its effects ; a
comparison quite incongruous witli Ills Jewish ideas.! In the first
three gospels Jesus pursues an entirely different course. In tliese,
where a misconstruction betrays itself on the part, of the disciples,
Jesus (except where he breaks off altogether, or where it is evident
that tlie evangelist unhistorically associates a number of metaphor-
ical discourses) applies himself with tlie assiduity of an earnest
teacher to tlie thorough explanation of tlie difficulty, and not until

•* T-» „.„> „ i-r,   + p,,n,n Brplsfhiifiider. ut sun.

400

THE LIFE OF JESU9.

he has effected this does he proceed, step by step, to convey further
instruction (e. g. Matt. xiii. 10 ff. 36 ff.; xv. 16; xvi. 8 ff.)* This
is the method of a wise teacher; on the contrary, to leap from one
subject to another, to overburthen and strain the mind of the hearer,
a mode of instruction which the fourth evangelist attributes to
Jesus, is wholly inconsistent with tliat character. To explain this
inconsistency, we must suppose tliat the writer of tlie fourth gospel
thought to heighten in the most effective manner the contrast which
appears from tlie first', between the wisdom of the one party and
the incapacity of tlie other, by representing the teacher as over-
whelming tlie pupil who put unintelligent questions on tlie most
elementary doctrine, with lofty and difficult themes, beneath which
Ills faculties are laid prostrate.

Prom v. 16, even those commentators wlio pretend to some
ability in this department, lose all hope of showing that tlie remain-
der of tlie discourse may have been spoken by Jesus. Not only does
Paulus make this confession, but even Olsliausen, with a concise
statement of his reasons.! At tlie above verse, any special reference
to Nicodemus vanishes, and there is commenced an entirely general
discourse on the destination of the Son of God, to confer a blessing
on tlie world, and on the manner in which unbelief forfeits tills bless-
ing. Moreover, these ideas are. expressed in a form, which at one
moment appears to be a reminiscence of tlie evangelist's introduc-
tion, and at another lias a striking similarity witli passages in tlie
first epistle of John.} In particular, tlie expression the only begot-
ten Son, o p.ovoysvf^ vtbc, which is repeatedly (v. 16 and 18.) attrib-
uted to Jesus as a designation of his own person, is nowhere else
found in Ills mouth, even in the fourth gospel; this circumstance,
however, marks it still more positively as a favourite phrase of the
evangelist (i. 14-18.), and of the writer of tlie Epistles (1 John
iv. 9). Further, many things are spoken of as past, which at the
supposed period of tills conversation with Nicodemus were yet future.
For even if tlie words, he gave, 's.6wev, refer not to tlie giving over

* De Wette adduces as examples of a similar procedure on the part of Jesus in the
synoptical gospels, Matth. xix. 21 ; xx. 22 f. But these two cases are of a totally dif-
ferent kind from the one under consideration in John.  We have here to treat of a want
of comprehension, in the face of which it is surprising tliat Jesus instead of descending to
its level, cliooses to elevate himself to a still less attainable altitude. In the passages
quoted from the aynoptists, on tlie other hand, we have examples of an excessive self-
valuation, too high an estimate of their ability to promote the cause of Jesus, on the part
of the rich young man and of the sons of Zebedee, and Jesus with perfect propriety checks
their egotistic ardour by the abrupt presentation of a higher demand. These instances
could only be parallel witli that of Kicodcinus, if the latter had piqued himself on ^ his
enlightenment, and Jesus, by a sudden night into a higher region, had sought to convince
him of his ignorance, f Bibl. Comm. 2, S. 96.

t III. 19: avT-ri (ie SUTIV ri npiaif, u-t    I. 9: r/v TO yuc TO u^-Swim, TO IJIUT'^OV
TO puc E/V/AuKev £(f Tor Koanov, icat ftyuiTTiaav •KU.VTd ur^punw, tf)f6[ievov elf TOV Koauav.
01 uviipuToi fluW.ov TO (TKOTOJ- JJ Tb i?uc.      .'>: Kat TO i^uc ev rg OKOTia ijinirel, KCU i] ono-

I[I. 10 : OV~<J ~yup r/yuTT^aev 6 T?£OC r6v rid avro ov Kars^a^sv.
Ktinuov, uaTe TOV vim avTov T&V fioYO-yeWl    1 John iv. 1); cvTovni iijiavt-pu^ri i] uyuvri
c6uaev. iva. TTUC o viarevuv n'c avrov, fiil TOV •SEOV ev •i/ulv, on TOV v!.ov avrov TUV ^o-
u^u/aiTai. aW ern Cwhv aluvtov.             voyevn umaTEif.sv o Seo': cli; TOV nocf^ov, iva

DISCOUESES OP JESUS IN THE FOUETH GOSPEL.

401

to death, but to the sending of the Messiah into the world ; tlie ex-
pressions, men loved darkness 'ffydnrjaav ol avOpunoi rb (T/CO-OC, and
their deeds were evil, ffv Trovrjpa avrwv TO Spya (v. 19.), as Llicke
also remarks, could only be used after tlie triumph of darkness liad
been achieved in tlie rejection and execution of Jesus: they belong
then to the evangelist's point of view at the time when lie wrote, not
to tliat of Jesus when on the threshold of his public ministry. In
general the whole of tilis discourse attributed to Jesus, with its con-
stant use of the third person to designate the supposed speaker;

with its dogmatical terms only begotten, light, and the like, applied
to Jesus; witli its comprehensive view of the crisis and its results,
wliich the appearance of Jesus produced, is far too objective for us to
believe that it came from the lips of Jesus. Jesus could not speak
thus of himself, but tlie evangelist might speak thus of Jesus. Hence
the same expedient lias been adopted, as in tlie case of tlie Baptist's
discourse already considered, and it lias been supposed that Jesus is
tlie speaker down to v. 16, but tliat from tliat point tlie evangelist
appends his own dogmatic reflections.* But there is again here no
intimation of sucli a transition in the text; ratlier, tlie connecting
word for, yap (v. 16.), seems to indicate a continuation of the same
discourse. No writer, and least of all tlie fourtli evangelist (comp.
vii. 39; xi. 51 f. ; xii. 16 : xxxiii. 37 ff.), would scatter his own ob-
servations thus undistingui shingly, unless lie wished to create a mis-
apprehension, f

If then it be establislied tliat tlie evangelist, from v. 16. to the
end of the discourse, means to represent Jesus as the speaker, while
Jesus can never liave so spoken; we cannot rest satisfied with the
half measure adopted by Luke, when he maintains tliat it is really
Jesus who continues to speak from tlie above passage, but that the
evangelist has interwoven his own explanations and amplifications
more liberally than before. For this admission undermines all cer-
tainty as to liow far tlie discourse belongs to Jesus, and how far to the
evangelist; besides, as the discourse is distinguished by the closest
uniformity of thought and style, it must be ascribed cither wholly
to Jesus or wholly to tlie evangelist. Qf tliese two alternatives the
former is, according to tlie above considerations, impossible; we are

• Paulas and Olshausen, in loc.   •}- Tholuck (Glaubwurdigkeit, S. 335.) adduces
as examples of a similar unobserved fusion of a discourse quoted from a foreign source,
with the writer's own matter, Gal. ii. 14 ff. Euseb. II. E. iii. 1, 39. Hieron. Comm. in
Jes. 53. But sucli instances in an epistle, a commentary or an liistorieal work interspersed
witli reasoning and criticism, are not parallel with those in an liistorieal narrative of the
nature of our fourth gospel.   In works of the former kind, the reader expects the author
to reason, and hence, when the discourse of another party has been introduced, he is pre-
pared at the slightest pause to see tlie author again take up tlie argument. It is quite
different with a work like our fourth gospel.   The introduction, it is true, is put forth as
the autlior's own reasoning, and it is there quite natural tliat after a brief quotation from
the disccurse of another, v. 15, he should, at v. 16, resume tlie cliaracter of speaker with-
out any express intimation, liut when once lie has entered on his narrative, which is
strictly a recital of wliat lias been done, and what has been said, all that he annexes with-
out any mark of distinction (as e. g. xii. 37.) to a discourse explicitly ascribed to another.

402

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

therefore restricted to the latter, which we Iiavc observed to be en-
tirely consistent witli tlie manner of tlie fourth evangelist.

But not only on tlie passage v. 16-21 must we pass this judg-
ment: v. 14 lias appeared to us out of keeping with tlie position of
Jesus; and the behaviour of Nicodemus, v. 4 and 9, altogether in-
conceivable. Thus in tlie very rirst sample, wlien compared witli
tlie observations which we have already made on John lii. 22 fl'. ;

iv. 1 ff., tlie fourth gospel presents to us all tlie peculiarities which
characterize its mode of reporting tlie discourses of Jesus.  They
arc usually commenced in tlie form of dialogue, and so far as this
extends, tlie lever that propels tlie conversation is tlie striking con-
trast between the spiritual sense and tlie carnal interpretation of the
language of Jesus: generally, however, tlie dialogue is merged into
an uninterrupted discourse, in which tlie writer blends tlie person
o'f Jesus witli Ills own, and makes tlie former use concerning him-
self, language which could only be used by John concerning Jesus.

§ 81. THE D1SCOUESES OF JESL'S, JOHN V-XII.

IN tlie fifth chapter of John, a long discourse of Jesus is con-
nected with a cure wrought by him on the sabbath (19-47). The
mode in which Jesus at v. 17 defends his activity on the sabbath,
is worthy of notice, as distina;uished from tliat adopted by him in
tlie earlier Gospels. These ascribe to him, in such cases, three ar-
guments : the example of David, wlio ate tlie show-bread; tlie pre-
cedent of the sabbatical labours of the priest's in the temple, quoted
also in John vii. 23 (Matt. xii. 3 ft. parall.): and tlie course pursued
with respect to an ox, sheep, or ass, that falls into the pit (Matt. xii.
11 parall.), or is let out to watering on the sabbath (Luke xiii. 18.):

all which arguments arc entirely in the practical spirit that charac-
terizes tlie popular teaching of Jesus. Tlie fourth evangelist, on tlie
contrary, makes him argue from tlie uninterrupted, activity of God,
and reminds us by the expression wliicli lie puts into tlie mouth of
Jesus, My .Father 'icorketh hitherto, 6 Tra-ffp wg dp-i epyd^Erai, of
a principle in tlie Alexandrian metaphysics, viz. God never ceases
to act, nwwv 6 Osb^ ovSi-o-e -avK-ai •:* a metaphysical proposition
more likely to be familiar to tlie author of tlie fourth gospel than to
Jesus. In the synoptical gospels, miracles of healing on the sabbath
are fallowed up by declarations respecting tlie nature and design of
the sabbatical institution, a species of instruction of wliicli the people
were greatly in need ; but in tlie present passage, a digression is im-
mediately made to tlie main theme of tlie gospel, the person of Christ
and liis relation to tlie Father.  The perpetual recurrence of this
theme in tlie fourth gospel lias led its adversaries, not without rea-
son, to accuse it of a tendency purely theoretic, and directed to tlie
glorification of Jesus.  In tlie matter of tlie succeeding discourse

DISCOURSES OP JESUS IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

403

there is nothing to create a difficulty, nothing that Jesus might not
have spoken, for it treats, with tlie strictest colierence, of thino-s
which the Jews expected of tlie Messiah, or wliicli Jesus attributed
to himself, according to tlie synoptists also: as, for instance, the
raising of the dead, and the office of judging tlie world. But this
consistency in tlie matter, only lieiglitcns tlie difficulty connected
witli the form and phraseology in which it is expressed. For the
discourse, especially its latter half (from v. 31), is full of the closest
analogies witli tlie first epistle of John, and witli passages in the
gospel in wliicli either the author speaks, or John tlie Baptist.* One
means of explaining tlie former resemblance is to suppose, tliat the
evangelist formed his style by closely imitating that of Jesus. Tliat
this is possible, is not to be disputed; but it. is equally certain that
it could proceed only from a mind destitute of originality and self-
conhdencc,-a character wliicli tlie fourth evangelist in nowise ex-
hibits.  Farther, as in tlie other gospels Jesus speaks in a thor-
oughly different tone and style, it would follow, if lie really spoke a3
lie is represented to have done by John, tliat tlie manner attributed
to him by tlie synoptists is fictitious.  Now, tliat this manner did
not originate witli the evangelists is plain from tlie fact, that cacli
of them is so little master of his matter. Neither could tlie bulk
of tlie discourses have been tlie work of tradition, not only because
they have a highly original cast, but because they bear tlie impress
of tlie alleged time and locality.  On tlie contrary, the fourth evan-
gelist, by the ease witli wliich he disposes Ins materials, awakens
the suspicion tliat they are of his own production; and some of Ills
favourite ideas and phrases, such as, The Father showeth the fSoit
all tliat himself doeth,\ and those already quoted, seem to have

* John. v. 20 : o •yv.a TraTrjp 4i/-E( TOY    Jolm iii. 35 (tlie Baptist) : o yup varf/p
vlov Kai ^uvTa ffe/.Kwaiv flirt;) a avTi}^ 7^oi£t. a-ya^a TOV vim.' Kai T^UVTO 6ecuK{v sv Ty ^.ipi

ail-rov.
24: o TOV ?.n-yov/tov uKOvbiv-lieTaftsfiriitCV    lJtili.iii.l4: f/ftsic: o'lSa/iev, on [iCTapc^fl-

iK TOV •QavuTOV U^ TfjV C,UTjV.                    Kft/lEV CK TOV ^QVUTOV Ei(; TT]V C,UT]V.

32 : KO.I. o«ia, on u^Tj^r^ cunv ^ {WftTvpia,    Joh. xix. 3;'* : Kai u^^y^ £C!OLV ai'rov ft
Sjv uapTVpei TTf-pi FU.CH',                        f^apTvpia^ KdKeivo^ O(O£T, on aA^i9^ /leyefc.
Conip xxi. 24.  1 Joli. 3, 13.

34 : i)'(,^ 6s Of Trapu uv^tpcivov T^V fiaprv-    3 John. v. 9 : cl TT/V ^lapTVpia.v TUV avQptd-
fi'lav Aaf^f3uvGf.                                KUV ^a^uvofzsr, ?/ f^aprvpt-a TOV ^EOV f^si^v

3G : c;/y & t^u f/apTupiav fiu!,u TOV 'luiiv- ioTiv on av-ni corn-' i? /.lapTupia Toi -Seov, i/v

VOV.                                             p£/i(lpTVp!/K£ 7T£pi TOV vlov abTOV.

37; nai o m'K^ef fie irar%» avToc iitfiap-

TVRTjKe Wp( IflOV.

IL>.: WTf Tr/v ffiuvr^v ai'TOi) a/c^Koare w-    Joh. i, 18: •S^ov o^Sels ^(JpffKC TTUTTOTE.
?~orf, oure Tt/.^oc dVTov WOUKOTS.            Comp. 1. Joh. iv. 12.

3y : K.ai TIJV 7^'ov ailTftv oi'K ^cre WWVTO.    1 Joli. i. 10 : KUI o TJayw, a.vrw ova icTW
iv vfuv,                                     iv Vfuv.

40 : Kill oil •9(7^T£ Q^dv irpdf {te, Iva i^uf/v    1 Joh. v. 12: o ftij S^w TOV vlov TOV •Sscw
fxVTe.                                        ^,w(v OVK l^n,

42; on T7/r uj.ttTrg.r TOV 'Scov ova eyre cv    1 Joh. ii. 15 : OVK ISTCV ^ uyum) rav rra-
tavTOK;.                                     rpof cv afiro.

44: 7T(.)^ SvvanQf vf^E?^ TTtGTWEiv, 6o^av    Joh. xi. 43 : r/'yuTrfJoav yap 77/v 66^av7uV
Trapu uW.^'A.uv ?.a^f3wovTs^. Kai Tf/v 66^av rrjV uv^puirw uuA?.ov, ^Trep TTJV Qo^av TOV ^t-ov.
Brapd TOU [tuvov T^emi •ov (^//mre,

•}• Viu. tliu passages compared by Gfrurer, 1, S. 194, from Philo, de Unguarum coii-

404 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

sprang from an Hellenistic source, rather than from Palestine. But
the chief point in tlie argument is, that in tins gospel John the Bap-
tist speaks, as we have seen, in precisely the same strain as the
author of the gospels, and Ills Jesus. It cannot be supposed, tliat
not only the evangelist, but the Baptist, whose public career was
prior to that of Jesus, and whose character was strongly marked,
modelled his expressions with verbal minuteness on t.liosc of Jesus.
Hence only two cases are possible: either the Baptist determined
the style of Jesus and the evangelist (wlio indeed appears to liave
been the Baptist's disciple); or tlic evangelist determined the style
of the Baptist and Jesus. Tlie former alternative will be rejected
by the orthodox, on the ground of tlie higher nature that dwelt in
Christ; and we are equally disinclined to adopt it, for tlie reason
that Jesus, even though he may have been excited to activity by
tlie Baptist, yet appears as a character essentially distinct from him,
and original; and for tlie still more weighty consideration, that the
style of tlie evangelist is much too feeble for tlie rude Baptist,-too
mystical for Ills practical mind. There remains, then, but the latter
alternative, namely, that the evangelist lias given his own style both
to Jesus and to the Baptist: an explanation in itself more natural
than the former, and supported by a multitude of examples from all
kinds of historical writers. If however tlie evangelist is thus re-
sponsible for tlie form of this discourse, it is still possible tliat the
matter way have belonged to Jesus, but we cannot pronounce to
wliat extent this is the case, and we have already had proof tliat the
evangelist, on suitable opportunities, very freely presents his own
reflections in the form of a discourse from Jesus.

In cliap. vi., Jesus represents himself, or rather his Father, v.
27 ff., as the giver of the spiritual manna. Tills is analogous to
tlie Jewish idea above quoted, tliat the second Goel, like tlie first,
would provide manna ;* and to the invitation of Wisdom in the Pro-
verbs, ix. 5, Come., eat of my bread: SsXOs-e, (paye-e -G)V Epuv Sip-uv.
But the succeeding declaration, that he is himself the bread of life
that comet/i down from heaven, aprof 6 iy&v b in -ov ovpavov ita-afiag
(v. 33 and 35) appears to find its true analogy only in tlie idea of
Philo, that the divine word, /loyoc 0eZoc, is that which nourishes the
soul, T& Tpeifxiv Trfv i/w^y.t From v. 51, tlie difficulty becomes still
greater. Jesus proceeds to represent his flesh as the bread from
lieavcn, which he will give for tlie life of the world, and to eat the
flesh of tfie Son of Man, and to drink his blood, lie pronounces
to be the only means of attaining eternal life. Tlie similarity of
these expressions to the words wliicli tlie synoptists and Paul attri-
bute to Jesua, at the institution of the Lord's Supper, led tlie older
commentators generally to understand tills passage as having rcfer-

* Sup. § 14.

\ De profugis, Opp. Mang., i. S. 5G6 Gfrorer, 1, S. 203. What is farther said of
ii..», . .'.A' n,', ^r.mi vr,if,nn. icn). mdiial oeovoiv uevvaol may be compared withJohn iv.

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

405

ence to the Sacramental supper, ultimately to be appointed by Jesus.*
The chief objection to this interpretation is, tliat before tlie institu-
tion of the supper, such an allusion would be totally unintelligible.
Still the discourse might have some sense, liowever erroneous, for
tlie hearers, as indeed it liad, according to tlie narrator's statement;

and tlie impossibility of being understood is not, in the fourth gos-
pel, so shunned by Jesus, tliat that circumstance alone would suffice
to render this interpretation improbable. It is certainly supported
by the analogy between the expressions in tlie discourse, and tlie
words associated with tlie institution of tlie supper, and tills analogy
lias wrung from one of our recent critics tlie admission, that even if
Jesus himself, in uttering the above expressions, did not refer to tlie
supper, the evangelist, in choosing and conveying tins discourse of
Jesus, miglit have had that institution in Ills mind, and miglit have
supposed that Jesus here gave a premonition of its import, f In tliat
case, however, he could scarcely have abstained from modifying the
language of Jesus ; so tliat, if tlic clioice of the expression eat the
flesh, &c., can only be adequately explained on the supposition of
a reference to the Lord's Supper, we owe it, without doubt, to the
evangelist alone.  Having once said, apparently in accordance with
Alexandrian ideas, that Jesus had described himself as the bread of
life, liow could he fail to be reminded of tlie bread, wdiich in the
Christian community was partaken of as the body of Clirist, together
with a beverage, as his blood ? He would the more gladly seize the
opportunity of making Jesus institute tlie supper prophetically, as
it were; because, as we sliall hereafter sec, he knew nothing definite
of its historical institution by jesus.f

The discourse above considered, also bears tlie form of a dialogue,
and it exhibits strikingly the type of dialogue which especially be-
longs to tlie fourth gospel: tliat, namely, in wliicli language intended
spiritually, is understood carnally. In tlie first place (v. 34), the
Jews (as tlie woman of Samaria in relation to tlie water) suppose
tliat by the bread ichich comcth dozen from heaven, Jesus means
some material food, and entreat him evermore to supply tliem with
such.   Such a misapprehension was certainly natural; but one
would have thought tliat tlie Jews, before they carried the subject
farther, would have indignantly protested against the assertion of
Jesus (v. 32), tliat Moses liad not given them heavenly bread. When,
Jesus proceeds to call himself the bread from heaven, tlie Jews in
tlie synagogue at Capernaum murmur tliat lie, the son of Joseph,
whose father- and mother they knew, should arrogate to himself a
descent from heaven (v. 41); a reflection which the synoptists witli
more probability attribute to the people of Nazareth, tlie native city
of Jesus, and to wliicli they assign a more natural cause. Tliat tlie
Jews should not understand (v. 53) liow Jesus could give them Ins
flesh to eat is very conceivable; and for tliat reason, as we liave ob-

* See Lucke's History of the Interpretation of this passage in Ins Comm. 2, Appen-

T> - r.)T 0'    A IT...,," I   T 2 (1U    + <-•„„,„ Tl»>>B,.hn»;fl<.r Prnliah n ;">«. 88 ft'

406

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

served, it, is the less so tliat Jesus should express himself thus un-
intelligibly. Neitlier is it surprising tliat tills hard saying aaXrjpbf
/loyo? sliould cause many disciples to fall away from liiin, nor easy
to perceive how Jesus could, in tlie first instance, himself give rea-
son for the secession, and then, on its occurrence, feel so much dis-
pleasure as is implied in v. 61 and 67. It is indeed said, tliat Jesus
wished to sift his disciples, to remove from Ills society tlic super-
ficial believers, tlie earthly-minded, whom he could not trust; but
tlie measure which he here adopted was one calculated to alienate
froin liiin even his best and most intelligent followers.  .For it is
certain tliat the twelve, wlio on other occasions knew not what was
meant by tlie leaven oftlic Pharisees (Matt. xvl. 7), or by tlie oppo-
sition between wliat goes into tlic mouth, and wliat comes out of it
(Matt. xv. 15), would not understand tlic present discourse ; and tlic
ico/'ds of eternal lif'', for the sake of which they remained witli him
(v. 6S), were assuredly not the words of this sixtli chapter.*

Tlie farther we read in tlie fourth gospel, the more striking is
tlie repetition of the same ideas and expressions.  The discourses
of Jesus during tlie Feast of Tabernacles, ch. vii. and vili. are, as
Lucke lias remarked, mere repetitions and amplifications of tlic op-
positions previously presented (especially in ch. v.), of tlic coining,
speaking, and acting, of Jesus, and of God (vii. 17, 28 f.; vili. 28 f.,
38, 40, 42. compare witli v. 30, 43; vi. 38.); of being from above,
wai KK ~wv avw, and/'/wrt beneath, KK. r&v ndru (viii. 23 comp. iii.
31.); of beariii" witness of one's self, and rcceivina' witness from

more striking is

/ '                        0                                                  '                               o

God (viii. 13-iy. eomp. v. 31-37.); of li"'ht and darkness (viii.
12. eomp. iii. 10 ft'., also xii. 35 f); of true and false judgment (viii.
15 f., comp. v. 30.). All tliat is new in tlicsc chapters, is quickly
repeated, as tlie mention of tlic departure of Jesus whither the Jews
cannot follow him (vii. 33 f., viii. 21.; comp. xiii. 33., xiv. 2 ff.,
xvi. 16 ff.); a declaration, to whieli arc attaclicd, in tlic first two
instances, very improbable misapprehensions or perversions on tlic
part of tlic Jews, who, although Jesus liad said, I go unto him that
wilt me., arc represented as imagining, at one time, tliat lie purposed
journeying to tlic dispersed oniony tlie Gentiles, at another, tliat
lie meditated suicide. How oficn, again, in this chapter are repeated
tlic asseverations, tliat lie seeks not his own honour, but tlic honour
of tlie leather (vii. 17 f., viii. 50, 54); tliat tlic Jews neither know
whence lie came, nor tlic father who sent him (vii. 28; viii. 14, 19,
54); that whosoever bclievcth in liini sliall have eternal life, shall
not see dcatli, wlille whosoever bclievcth not nmst die in his sins,
having no share in eternal life (viii. 21, 24, 51; eomp. iii. 36, vi.
40.).-Tlic ninth chapter, consisting chiefly of tlic deliberations of
tlie Sanhedrim witli the man born blind, whom Jesus h;id restored

having no share in eternal life (viii. 21

* In relation to this chapter, I entirely approve the following remark in the Proba-
bilia CP- •'>(»): vufrrvtur-Jwii.-, ijw ifinduisw, ui. vbrb'i^ iUn.di:rtt Jutlii.'i.-f, »<'<• ah us tnhHif^-
reftu: jt't vv.i-fi ?;<•(.• «J'tt^ w aiJvn' yofnit, nci^n sl ila do''lfism'f. fiinia vjf't'fi.swty qtfititfti 'Uliui^

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

407

to sight, has of course the form of conversation, but as Jesus is less
on tlie scene than heretofore, there is not tlie usual amount of artifi-
cial contrast; in its stead, however, there is, as we shall presently
find, another evidence of artistic desio'n in the narrator.

7                                                                                                      0

Tlie tenth chapter commences witli the well-known discourse on
the Good Shepherd; a discourse which lias been incorrectly called
a parable.* Even the briefest among tlic oilier parables of Jesus,
such as tliat of tlie leaven and of tlie mustard-seed, contain tlic out-
line of a history that dcvelopes itself, having a commencement, pro-
gress, and conclusion. Here, on tlie contrary, there is no historical
development; even tlie particulars tliat have an historical character
are stated generally, as tilings tliat arc wont to happen, not as tilings
tliat once liappcned, and they are left without farther limitation;

moreover, tlie door usurps the place, of tlie Shepherd, wliicli is at
first tlie principal image ; so that we have here, not a parable, but
an allegory. Thcrcfure tills passage at least-(and we sliall find no
other, for the similitude of tlie vine, cli. xv., coines, as Lucke con-
fesses, under the same category as the one in question)-furnishes
no argument against tlie allegation by wliicli recent critics have
justified their suspicions as to tlie authenticity of tlie fourth gospel;

namely, that its author seems ignorant of tlie parabolic mode of
teaching which, according to tlie oilier evangelists, was habitual
with Jesus. It docs not however appear totally unknown to tlie
fourth evangelist tliat Jesus was fond of teacliing by parables, for
he attempts to give examples of this method, both in cli. x. and
xv., tlic tirst of which lie expressly styles -A parable, -apoifzia. But
it is obvious tliat tlic parabolic form was not accordant with his
taste, and tliat lie was too deficient in tlic faculty of depicting ex-
ternal tilings, to abstain from tlie intermixture of reflections, wlience
the parable in his hand became an allegory.

Tlic discourses of Jesus at the Feast of Tabernacles extend to
x. 18. From v. 25, tlic evangelist professes to record sayings which
were uttered by Jesus three months later, at tlic Feast of Dedica-
tion. When, on this occasion, tlic Jews desire from him a distinct
declaration whether lie be the Messiah, his immediate reply is, that
lie has already told tliem this sufficicntiv, and lie repeats his appeal
to tlie testimony of tlie Father, as given in tlic wor'Jcs, epya, done
by Jesus in his name (as in v. 36.).  Hereupon, by reason of the
incidental remark tliat his unbelieving questioners were not of his
sheep, tlie evangelist reverts to tlie allegory wliicli lie liad recently
abandoned, and repeats part of it word for word.f But not recently

* E. g. by Tholack and Lucke. Tlie latter, however, allows tliat it is rather an in-
cipient than a complete parable. Olshausen also remarks, tliat tlie discourses of tlie
Shepherd and tlie Vine are rather comparisons than parables; and Neander shows himself
willing to distinguish the parable presented by the synoptists as a species, under the genus
similitude, to whk-h tlic napoi/^iat or John belong.

•}• x. 27 ; TU TpujjaTCt Tit eftu. Tjyf (jiwfii;    x. 3; Kai Til vpufSara T^f ijiuvyi; avrov
/.toy aKOvet,                                    UKOVEV

KH^ D } wualit^ av7u'                          34: Kai yn-'uaKf'i TU ffid.

408 THE LIFE OP JESUS.

had. Jesus abandoned tills allegory; for since its delivery three
months are supposed to have elapsed, and it is certain tliat in tlie
interim much must have been spoken, done, and experienced by
Jesus, that would thrust this figurative discourse into tlic back-
ground of his memory, so tliat lie would be very unlikely to recur
to it, and in no case would he be able to repeat it, word for word.
He wlio had just quitted tlie allegory was tlie evangelist, to wliom
three months liad not intervened between tlie inditing of tlie first
half of this chapter, and tliat of the second. He wrote at once what,
according to Ilia statement, was chronologically separated by a wide
interval; and lience tlie allegory of tlic shepherd might well leave
so distinct an echo in his memory, tliougli not in tliat of Jesus. If
any think tliat they can solve tills difficulty by putting only the ver-
bal similarity of the later discourse to tlic earlier one to tlie account
of the evangelist, sucli an opinion cannot be interdicted to them.
For others, this instance, in connexion with the rest, will be a posi-
tive proof tliat tlie discourses of Jesus in tlic fourth gospel are to a
great extent tlie free compositions of the evangelist.

The same conclusion is to be drawn from tlie discourse with
which tlie fourth evangelist represents Jesus as closing his public
ministry (xii. 44-50). Tins discourse is entirely composed of remi-
niscences out of previous chapters,* and, as Paulus expresses it,f is
a mere echo of some of tlie principal apophthegms of Jesus occur-
ring in tlie former part of tlie gospel. One cannot easily consent
to let tlie ministry of Jesus close with a discourse so little original,
and tlie majority of recent commentators are of opinion tliat it is
tlie intention of tlie evangelist here to give us a mere epitome of the
teaching of Jesus.f According to our view also, tlie evangelist is
the real speaker; but we must contend that his introductory words,
Jesus cried and said, 'laovc; 6e 'eicpa^s nal d-rev, are intended to im-
ply tliat wliat follows is an actual harangue, from tlie lips of Jesus.
This commentators will not admit, and they can appeal, not with-
out a show of reason, to tlie statement of tlic evangelist, v. 36, tliat
Jesus withdrew himself from tlic public eye, and to his ensuing ob-
servations on tlie obstinate unbelief of tlie Jews, in which lie seems
to put a period to tlie public carreer of Jesus; whence it would be
contrary to his plan to make Jesus again step forward to deliver a
valedictory discourse. I will not, with tlie older expositors, oppose
to tlicse arguments tlie supposition tliat Jesus, after his withdrawal,
returned to pronounce tlicse words in the ears of tlie Jews; but 1
liold fast to tlie proposition, that by tlie introduction above quoted,
the evangelist can only have intended to announce an actual ha-
rangue. It is said, indeed, tliat tlie aorist in wpa^e and dm lias tlie

Also icdyu L^»/r cu.uvlov ViSu^i ai'-ntf corresponds to C;'L> r/Wov, 'iva (/,»/r c^uat, •v. 10, ami
Kai on,t dpTruOft Ttf ai'Til is. T^ yipof ftov is the counterpart of what is said v. 12 of the
hireling who allows the sheep to be seatterecl.

* Comp. v, 44 witli vii, 17 ; v. 4<i with viii. 12 ; v. 47 with iii, 17 ; v, 48 with iii.
<>a . „ ,-.11 „,,», „,. JII . y;;. 17, viii. as.  + L. J. b. S. 143, t Lueke, Tholuck, I'aulus,

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

409

signification of tlie pluperfect, and that we have liere a recapitulation
of tlie previous discourses of Jesus, notwithstanding wliich the Jews
had not given him credence. But to give tills retrospective sio-nifi-
cation there ought to be a coiTesponding indication in tlie words
themselves, or in the context, whereas this is far less tlie case than
e. g. in John xviii. 24. Hence the most probable view of tlie ques-
tion is this: John had indeed intended to close tlie narrative of the
public ministry of Jesus at v. 36, but his concluding observations,
v. 37 ff., with tlic categories of faith, ma-ic, and unbeli-^f, a.rtiar'i.a,
reminded him of discourses which lie liad already recorded, and lie
could not resist tlie temptation of making Jesus recapitulate them
with additional emphasis in a parting harangue.

§ 82. ISOLATED MAXIMS OF JESUS, COMMON TO THE FOURTH GOSPEL

AKD THE SYNOPTICAL ONES.

THE long discourses of Jesus above examined are peculiar to
tlie fourth gospel; it lias only a few brief maxims to wliicli tlie sy-
noptists present parallels. Among the latter, we need not give a
special examination to those wliicli are placed by Jolm in an equally
suitable connexion, with tliat assigned, to them by tlie other evan-
gelists (as xii. 25. comp. with Matt. x. 39; xvi. 25; and xiii. 16.
comp. witli Matt. x. 24.); and as tlie passage ii. 19 compared with
Matt. xxvi. 61, must be reserved until we treat of tlic history of
tlie Passion, there remain to us only three passages for our present
consideration.

Tlie first of tlicse is iv. 44, where tlie evangelist, after having
mentioned tliat Jesus departed from Samaria into Galileo, adds, For
Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honour in his own
country, av~b<; yao b 'I. Kp.apTvp'f]oev, o-i Trpo(pf)~ric; iv TT) 16'ia TrarplSi
riuifv ova ^et. We find tlic same idea in Mattlicw xiii. 57. (Mark
vi. 4; Luke iv. 24.), A prophet is not v:ithoiit honour, save in his
own country and ill his ovn house, OVK, wi-t Trp^r^f a-rt/tcx-, el fiff
iv rg naTpiSi. avrov ical iv -^ olnia avrov. ]3ut while in tlie latter case
it stands in a highly appropriate connexion, as a remark prompted
by the ungracious reception which Jesus met with in his native city,
and wliicli caused him to leave it again: in Jolm, on tlic contrary, it
is given as a motive for the return of Jesus into Ills own country, Ga-
lileo, where, moreover, lie is immediately said to be warmly received.
The experience stated in tlic above sentence, would rather have dis-
inclined than induced Jesus to undertake a journey into Galileo;

hence tlie expedient of translating yap by although, is the best adapt-
ed to tlie necessity of tlic case, and has even been embraced by Kuinol,
except tliat, unhappily, it is an open defiance of tlie laws of language.
"Unquestionably, if Jesus knew tliat tlic prophet held tills unfavour-
able position in Ills native wwitry, -n-aTptc, it is not probable that
he would regard it as a reason for going thither. Some expositors,*

410 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

therefore, liave 'been induced to understand Trarp'i^, not as the prov-
ince, but in a narrower sense, as the native city, and to supply, after
the statement that Jesus -went into Galilee, tlie observation, which
they assume tlie evangelist to have omitted, that he avoided Ins na-
tive city Nazareth, for tlie reason given in tlie ensuing verse. But
an ellipsis such as tills explanation requires us to suppose, belongs
not less to tlie order of impossibilities than -the transmutation of
"yap into though. The attempt to introduce tlie desiderated state-
ment tliat Jesus did not visit his own fra-pig into tlie present passage
lias been therefore renounced; but it has yet been thought possible
to discover there an intimation that he did not soon return thither;

a delay for wliich tlie maxim, on -rpo^-y/c K. r. /I. might consistently
be, quoted as a reason.* But to render tills interpretation admissible,
the entire period of tlie absence of Jesus from Galilee must have
been mentioned immediately before tlie notice of his return ; instead
of this, however, only the short time tliat Jesus had tarried in Sa-
maria is given (v. 45), so that in ludicrous disproportion of cause
and effect, tlie fear of tlie contempt of Ills fellow countrymen would,
on tlie above supposition, be made tlie reason for delaying his return
into Galilee, not until after a residence of some months in Judea,
but until after tlie lapse of two days spent in Samaria.  So long,
therefore, as Galilee and Nazareth arc admitted to be the Tra-pl^ of
Jesus, tlie passage in question cannot be vindicated from tlie ab-
surdity of representing, tliat Jesus was instigated to return thither
by tlie contempt wliicli lie knew to await him. Consequently, it be-
comes the interest of the expositor to recollect, tliat Matthew and
Luke pronounce Bethlehem to lie tlie birthplace of Jesus, whence it
follows tliat Judca was his native country, wliicli lie now forsook on
account of tlie contempt lie liad there experienced, f But according
toiv. 1. comp. ii. 24, iii. 26 ff'., Jesus liad won a considerable num-
ber of adherents in Judca, and could not therefore complain of a
lack of honour, rip]: moreover tlie enmity of tlie Pharisees, hinted
at in iv. 1, was excited by tlie growing consequence of Jesus in
Judea, and was not at all rcfcrrible to such a cause as tliat indicated
in tlie maxim: o-( -po^-rc K.. r /I. .Further, tlie entrance into Ga-
lileo is not connected in our passage witli a departure from Judea,
but from Samaria; and as, according to tlie import of the text, Je-
sus departed from Samaria and went into Galilee, because lie had
found tliat a prophet lias no honour in his own country, Samaria
might rather seem to be pointed out as his native country, in con-
formity with tlie reproach cast on him by tlie Jews, viii. 4i->; though
even tills supposition would not give consistency to the passage, for

efiapTvp-iiaev tlie signification of the pluperfect, and to understand yap as an explicative,
But 1 tlo nut sec how this can lie of any avail, for yup and ovv (v, 4.'>,) would still form
a relation ot' a^n-cement between two propositions, wliich one would have expected to be
opposed to each other liy viv and 6s,

* Paulus. Cuinni 4, S. 2.">1, .">(;,   -i- Tills id-ra is so entirely in the spirit of the an-
cient harmonists, tliat I can scarcely believe Lilcke to be the first to whom it liad occurred

DISCOURSES OF JESL'S IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

411

in Samaria also Jesus is said, iv. 39, to have liad a favourable re-
ception. Besides, we have already seen* tliat the fourth evano-elist
knows nothing of the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem, but on all occa-
sions presupposes him to be a Galileau and a Nazarene. From the
above considerations we obtain only tlie negative result, tliat it is
impossible to discover any consistent relation between the maxim
in question and tlie context. A positive result,-namely, how the
maxim came to occupy its actual position, notwithstanding this want
of relation, will perhaps be obtained when we have examined the
two other passages belonging to tlie present head of our inquiry.

Tlie declaration xiii. 20, lie tliat recelveth you, rewiveth me,
and he tliat rccciveth me rcceiveth him that sent lize, lias an almost
verbal parallel in Matt. x. 40. In John, it is preceded by the pre-
diction of the betrayal of Jesus, and his explanation to Ills disciples
tliat he liad told them tills before it came to pass, in order tliat wlien
his prediction was fulfilled., they might believe in him as the Mes-
siah. What. is tlie connexion between tlicsc subjects and tlie above
declaration, or between tlie latter and its ensuing context, where Je-
sus recurs to Ins betrayer ? It is said tliat Jesus wished to impress
on liis disciples tlie hi^'li dignity of a messianic missionary, a dignity
winch the betrayer thought lightly of losing;! but tlie negative idea
of loss, on wliich this supposition turns, is not intimated in tlie text.
Others arc of opinion tliat Jesus, observing tlie disciples to be dis-
heartened by tlie mention of the betrayer, sought to inspire them
witli new courage by representing to them their hi"'h value ::j: but in
tliat case lie would hardly have reverted immediately after to tlie
traitor.  Others, again, conjecture that some intermediate sentences
have been omitted by tlie writer ;§ but this expedient is not much
happier than tliat of Kuinol, who supposes tlie passage to be a gloss
taken from Matt. x. 40, united originally to v. 1G of cliap. xiii. of
John, but by some chance transposed to tlie end of the paragraph.
Nevertheless, tlie indication of v. 16 is an useful way-mark.  This
verse, as well as v. 20, lias a parallel in tlie discourse of instruc-
tions in Mattlicw (x. 24.); if a few fragments of tills discourse had
readied tlie author of tlie fourth gospel through tlie medium of tra-
dition, it is very probable tliat one of them would bring tlio others
to liis recollection. In v. 16 there is mention of the sent, uToaro^oi;,
and of hili'i u;1io sent Aim,, "re/^ac av-bv ; so in v. 20, of tliosc whom
Jesus will send, and of Him wlio sent Jesus. It is true, tliat the
one passage lias a humiliating, tlie other an encouraging tendency,
and their affinity lies therefore, not in tlie sense, but in tlio words;

so tliat as soon as the fourth evangelist puts down, from memory,
traditional sayings of Jesus, we see him subject to tlie same law of
association as tlie synoptists. It would have been the most natural
arrangement to place v. 20 immediately after v. 16; but tlie thought
of tlie traitor was uppermost in tlie mind of tlie writer, and lie could

* Vid. sup. g 39.   + I'aulus, L, J. 1, B, S. 158.  { Lilcke, 2, S. 478. § Tholuck,

412

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

easily postpone the insertion of an apophthegm that had only a

verbal connexion with Ilia previous matter.

Our third passage, xiv. 31, lies yet farther witliin the domain of
the history of the Passion than tlie one last examined, but as, like
tills, it can be viewed quite independently, we sliall not be anticipat-
ing if we include it in our present chapter. In the above passage,
the words Arise, let us go hence, eyelpecsOs, d'yw^sv ev-evOev, remind
us of those by which Jesus, Matt. xxvi. 46, Mark xiv. 42, summons
his disciples to join him in encountering tlie traitor : liise, let us be
aoinq, eyeipEaOe dydip.sv. Tlie position of the words in Jolin is per-
plexing, because the summons to depart has no effect; Jesus, as it
lie liad said nothing of the kind, immediately continues (xv. 1,), I
am the true vine, &c., and does not take his departure with his dis-
ciples until after he has considerably prolonged his discourse. Ex-
positors of every hue have been singularly unanimous in explaining
the above words by the supposition, that Jesus certainly intended at
the moment to depart and betake himself to Getlisemane, but love
for his disciples, and a strong desire to impart to them still farther
admonition and comfort, detained him ; that hence, the first part of
the summons, Arise, was executed, but tliat, standing in tlie room
in which he had supped, lie pursued Ills discourse, until, later, (xviii.
1.), he also put into effect the words, let us go hence.* It is possible
tliat the circumstances were such; it is also possible that tlie image
of this last evening, with all its details, might be engraven so deeply
and accurately in tlie memory of a disciple, that lie might narrate
how Jesus arose, and how toucliingly lie lingered. But one wlio
wrote under tlie influence of a recollection thus lively, would note
the particulars which were most apparent; tlie rising to depart and
the delay,-not the mere words, which without tlie addition of tliose

•ibic. Here
conjecture arises that a reminiscence of tlie evangelical tradition pre-
sented itself to tlie writer, and tliat he inserted it just where it oc-
cured to him, not, as it happened, in the best connexion; and tills
conjecture assumes probability so soon as we discover wliat might
have reminded him of tlie above expression. In the synoptical
parallels the command, I-ivse, let us lie going, is connected witli tlie
announcement, Behold the hour is at hand, and the Son of man
is betrayed into the hands of sinners-behold he is at hand that
doth betray me ; with tlie announcement, tliat is, of tlie hostile
power which is approaching, before which, however, Jesus exhibits
no fear, but goes to encounter tlie danger witli the decision implied
in that command.  In John's gospel, also, Jesus, in the passage
under our notice, liad been speaking of a liostile power when he said,
The prince of this world cometh and hath nothing in me. It
makes little difference tliat in Jolin it is tlie power tliat dwells in tlie
betrayer, and in those led by him, wliile, in tlie synoptical gospels,

circumstances are altogether unintelli
&   . .

again, then, tlie

* Paulus, L. J. 1. B. S. 175 ; Lucke, Tholuek, Olshausen, in loc., Hug, Einleit. in
Hnafl T 9 S. 9m

DISCOUESES OP JESUS IN THE FOUETH GOSPEL.

413

it is the betrayer who is impelled by that power, that is said to ap-
proach. If the author of the fourth gospel knew by tradition tliat
Jesus liad united with the announcement of an approaching dano-er
the words, Eise, let us be going, this expression would be likely to
occur to him on tlie mention of the prince of this world; and as in
tliat stage of his narrative he had placed Jesus and his disciples in
tlie city and witliin doors, so that a considerable change of place waa
necessary before they could encounter the enemy, lie added to ayufisv
(let us go), evTevOsv ^hence). As, however, this traditional fragment
liad intruded itself unawares into the train of thought, which he de-
signed to put as a farewell discourse into tlie mouth of Jesus, it waa
immediately lost sight of, and a free course was given to the stream
of valedictory instruction, not yet exhausted.

If, from the point of view now attained, we glance back on our
first passage, iv. 44, it is easy to see how tlie evangelist might be
led to insert in so unsuitable a connexion the testimony of Jesus as
to tlie treatment of a prophet in his own country. It was known
to him traditionally, and he appears to have applied it to Galileo in
general, being ignorant of any unfavourable contact of Jesus with
the Nazarenes. As, therefore, he knew of no special scene by which
tins observation might have been prompted, he introduced it where
the simple mention of Galilee suggested it, apparently without any
definite idea of its bearing.

The result of the above investigation is this; the fourth evan-
gelist succeeds in giving connectedness to his materials, when he
presents his own tliouglits in the form of discourses delivered by
Jesus; but lie often fails lamentably in tliat particular, wlien he lias
to deal with tlie real traditional sayings of Jesus. In tlie above
instances, when lie has the same problem before him as the synop-
tists, lie is as unfortunate in its solution as they; nay, he is in a
yet more evil case, for his narrative is not homogeneous with the
common evangelical tradition, and presented few places where a
genuine traditional relic could be inserted. Besides, he wag accus-
tomed to cast his metal, liquid from his own invention, and was little
skilled in tlie art of adapting independent fragments to each other,
so as to form an harmonious mosaic.

§ 83. THE MODEEN DISCUSSIONS ON THE AUTHENTICITY OF THE
DISOOUESES IN THE GOSPEL OF JOHN-EESULT.

THE foregoing examination of the discourses of Jesus in the
fourth gospel, has sufficiently prepared us to form a judgment on
the controversy of whicli they liave recently been the subject. Mod-
ern criticism views these discourses with suspicion, partly on ac-
count of their internal contexture, which is at variance with certain
generally received rules of historical probability, and partly on ac-
count of tlieir external relation to other discourses and narratives.

414

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

With respect to tlic internal contexture of the above discourses,
there arises a twofold question : Docs it correspond to the laws, first,
of verisimilitude, and secondly, of memory ?

It is alleged by tlic friends of tlie fourth gospel tliat its discourses
are distinguished by a peculiar stamp of truth and credibility ; that
the conversations which it represents Jesus as holding with men ot
tlie most diverse disposition and capacity, are faithful delineations
of character, satisfying tlic strictest demands of psychological cri-
ticism.* In opposition to tills, it is maintained to be in tlie high-
est degree improbable, tliat Jesus should have adopted prccise-ly the
same style of teaching to persons differing widely in their degrees
of cultivation; tliat lie should have spoken to the Galileans in the
synagogue at Capernaum not more intelligibly than to a master of
Israel; tliat tlic matter of his discourses should have turned almost
entirely on one doctrine.-tlie dignity of his person; and tliat their
form should have been such, as to seem selected witli a view to
perplex and repel his hearers. Neither, it is further urged, do the
interlocutors express themselves in conformity with their position
and character. Tlie most educated Pharisee lias no advantage in
intelligence over a Samaritan woman of tlie lowest grade; tlie one,
as well as the other, can only put a carnal interpretation on the dis-
course which Jesus intends spiritually; their misconstructions, too,
are frequently so glaring, as to transcend all belief, and so uniform
tliat they seem to belong to a standing set of features witli wliicli
the author of the fourth gospel lias chosen, for tlie sake of contrast,
to depict those whom lie brings into conversation with Jesus.f
Hence, I confess, I understand not wliat is tlic meaning of veri-
similitude in tlie mind of tliosc wdio ascribe it to the discourses of
Jesus in tlic gospel of John.

As to tlie second uoint, regarding tlie powers of memory, it is
pretty generally agreed that discourses of the kind peculiar to John's
gospel,-in contradistinction to the apothegms and parables, eitlicr
isolated or strung together, in tlie synoptical gospels,-namely, se-
ries of dependent propositions, or prolonged dialogues, are among
the most difficult to retain and reproduce witli accuracy.t Unless
such discourses were reduced to writing at tlie moment of their de-
livery, all liope of their faithful reproduction must be abandoned.
Hence Dr. Paulus once actually entertained tlie idea, tliat in the
judgment-halls of tlie temple or tlie synagogues at Jerusalem, there
were stationed a sort of shorthand writers, wliose office it w^as to
draw up verbal processes, and that from their records the Christians,
after the deatli of Christ, made transcripts.§ In like manner, Ber-
tholdt was of opinion, that our evangelist, during the lifetime of

* Wegscheider, Einl. in clas Evang. Job. S. 271 ; Tlwluck, Comm. S. 37 f. f Thug
Eckermann, tlieol. Beitrage, .'», 2, S. 228; (Vogi-1) der Evangelist Johannes iinil seine
Ausleger vor dem jiingstcn Gericht, 1, S. 28 fi'., Wegsclu-iJer, S. 281 ; Bretsehneider,
Probabil. 33, 4."), apud Wcgscheider, ut sup. S. W I ; Brutachneider, Probab. p. 33, 45.

MSCOUBSES OF JESUS IN THE FOUETH GOSPEL

415

Jesus, took down most of the discourses of Jesus in the Aramsean

language, and made tliese notes the foundation of Ills gospel, com-
posed at a much later period.* These modern hypotheses are clearly
unhistorical ;f nevertheless, their propounders were able to adduce
many reasons in their support. The prophetic declarations of Jesus
relative to his death and resurrection, said Bcrtholdt, are more in-
definite in Jolm than in the synoptical gospels, a sure si"-n that
they were recorded before their fulfilment, for otherwise the writer's
experience of tlie event would have reflected more clearness on the
predictions. To tills we may add tlie kindred argTinicnt, by "which
Henke thought it possible to establish the genuineness of tlie dis-
courses in John: namely, that tlie fourth Evangelist not seldom
appends explanatory remarks, often indeed erroneous, to the obscure
expression of Jesus, thus proving tliat he was scrupulously consci-
entious in reporting tlie discourses, for otherwise lie would liave
mingled his comments with their original matter.t But it is with
justice objected, that tlie obscurity of tlie predictions in the fourth
gospel is in perfect harmony with tlie mystical spirit tliat pervades
the work, and as, besides, tlie author, together with his fondness
for the obscure and enigmatical, indisputably possessed taste, he
must have been conscious that a prophecy would only be tlie more
piquant and genuine-looking, the more darkly it was delivered: lienee,
though he put those predictions into the mouth of Jesus long after
the events to which they refer, lie might yet cliose to give them an
indefinite form.  Tills observation helps to explain why tlie evan-
gelist, when elucidating some obscure expressions of Jesus, adds
that. his disciples did not understand them until after his resurrec-
tion, or after the outpouring of the Holy Spirit (11. 22; vii. 39); for
the opposition of tlie darkness in wliicli the disciples at one time
groped, to tlie liglit which ultimately arose on them, belongs to tliat
order of contrasts witli wliicli this gospel abounds. Another argu-
ment, adopted by Bertholdt and approved by Tlioluck, is, that in
the discourses of the fourth gospel there sometimes occur observa-
tions, wliich, having no precise meaning in themselves, nor any
connexion with tlie rest of tlie discourse, must, have been occasioned
by some external circumstance, and can only be accounted for on.
tlie supposition of prompt, nay, of immediate reduction to writing;

and among their examples tlie passage, Arise, let us go hence (xiv.
31), is one of tlie most important. But tlie origin of such digres-
sive remarks lias been above explained, in a manner tliat renders
tlie hypothesis of instantaneous note-taking superfluous.

Thus commentators liad to excogitate some other means of cer-
tifying the genuineness of the discourses of Jesus in tlie fourth gos-
pel. Tlie general argument, so often adduced, founded on wliat a

^ Veroshnilia de origine evangelii Joannis, opusc. p. 1 ff. Einl. in das N. T. S. 1302
ff. This opinion is approved by Wugschcider, ut sup. p. 270 ff. and also Mug. 2, 2U3 f.
and Tlioluck, Coinm. p. 38, think the supposition of early notes not to be altogether re-
jected.   + Lucke. 1. S. 192 f.   + Henke. proerramm. duo illustratur Johannes apostolua

416

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

good memory might achieve, especially among men of simple lives,

unused, to writing, lies in the region of abstract possibility, where, as
Liicke remarks,* there may always be nearly as much said against
as for a theory. It has been thought more effectual to adopt an ar-
gument resting on a narrower basis, and to appeal to the individual
distinctions of tlie apostle John,-to his intimate and peculiar rela-
tion to Jesus as the favourite disciple,-to his enthusiasm for his
master, wliicli must surely have strengthened his memory, and have
enabled him to preserve in the most lively recollection all that can.»3
from tlie lips of his divine friend.f Although this peculiar relation
of John to Jesus rests on the authority of John's gospel alone, we
might, without reasoning in a circle, draw from it conclusions as to
the credibility of tlie discourses communicated by him, were the
faults of wliicli his gospel is accused only such as proceed from tlie
inevitable fading of tlie memory; because the positive notices of tliat
relation could never flow from tills negative cause. As, however,
tlie suspicion which lias arisen to the prejudice of tlie fourth evan-
gelist lias gone far beyond those limits, even to the extent of taxing
him with free invention, no fact resting on tlie word of John can be
used in support of the discourses which he communicates. But
neither the above relation, if admitted, nor tlie remark that John
apparently attached himself to Jesus in early youth, when impres-
sions sink deepest, and from the time of his master's death lived in
a circle where tlie memory of his words and deeds was cherished, f
suffices to render it probable that John could retain in his mind long
scries of ideas, and complicated dialogues, until the period in which
the composition of his gospel must be placed. For critics are agreed
that tlie tendency of tlie fourth gospel, its evident aim to spiritualize
the common faith of Christians into the Gnosis, and thus to crush
many errors which liad sprung up, is a decisive attestation tliat it
was composed at a period wlien the church had attained a degree
cf maturity, and consequently in tlie extreme old age of tlie apostle. §

Hence tlie champions of the discourses in question are fain to
bring forward, as a forlorn hope, tlie supernatural assistance of the
Paraclete, wliicli was promised to tlie disciples, and wliicli was to
restore all that Jesus had said to their remembrance. This is done
byThohick with great confidence,!) by Lucke with some diffidence, *[
which Tholuck's Anzeiger severely censures, but which we consider
laudable, because it implies a latent consciousness of the circle that
is made, in attempting to prove the truthfulness of tlie discourses in
John, by a promise which appears nowhere but in those discourses ;**
and of the inadequacy of an appeal, in a scientific inquiry, to a pop-
ular notion, such as tliat of tlie aid of the Holy Spirit. Tlie con-

* Ut sup. p. 199.   •;• Wegscheider, p. 28G ; Liicke, p. 195 f.   }• Wegscheider, p.
285 ; Lucke, ut sup.   <i Liicke, S. 124 f. 175. Kern, fiber den Ursprung des Ev. Mat-
thai, in der Tub. Zeitschrift, 1834, 3, S. 109.   |1 S. 89.   T S. 197, ".But lastly, why
should -we fear to adduce," &c.   ** The aid promised to the disciples -when brought be-
f^ro r.ilBrn anil t.-.l.nnals. fifntt. •x. 19 f.. is niiit.e distinct from a briiisAle to remembrance

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

417

sciousness of this inadequacy shows itself indirectly in Tholuck for
he ekes out tlie assistance of the Paraclete by early notes; and in
Lucke also, for he renounces the verbal authenticity of the discourses
in John, and only contends for their substantial veracity on "rounds
chiefly connected with the relation which tlicy bear to otner dis-
courses.

The external relation of tlie discourses of Jesus in John's gospel
is also twofold; for they may be compared botli witli tliose discourses
which tlie synoptists put into tlie mouth of Jesus, and witli tlie man-
ner in whicli the author of tlie fourth gospel expresses himself wlien
he is avowedly tlie speaker.

As a result of tlio former comparison, critics have pointed out
the important difference that exists between the respective discourses
in their matter, as well as in their form. In the first three gospels,
Jesus closely adapts his teaching to the necessities of his sb"pherd-
less people, contrasting, at one time, the corrupt institutions of the
Pharisees witli tlie moral and religious precepts of the Mosaic law;

at another, the carnal messianic liopes of the age with the purely
spiritual nature of his kingdom, and tlie conditions of entrance there-.
in. In tlie fourth gospel, on the contrary, lie is perpetually dilating,
and often in a barren, speculative manner, on tlie doctrine of his
person and higher nature: so tliat in opposition to tlie diversified
doctrinal and practical materials of tlie synoptical discourses, we
have in John a one-sided dogmatism.* That this opposition does
not hold invariably, and tliat in the discourses of tlie synoptical gos-
pels there arc passages which have more affinity witli tliose of John,
and vice versa, must be granted to judicious critics ;f but the im-
portant preponderance of tlie dogmatical element on tlie one side,
and of tlie practical on tlie oilier, is a difficulty tliat demands a thor-
ough explanation. In answer to this requisition, it is common to
adduce tlie end wliicli Jolin is supposed to have had in view in the
composition of his gospel: namely, to furnish a supplement to the
first three gospels, and to supply their omissions. But if Jesus
tauglit first in one style, then in another, how was it that the synop-
tists selected almost exclusively tlie practical and popular, John,
nearly witliout exception, the dogmatic and speculative portions of
Ins discourse ? This is accounted for in a manner intrinsically prob-
able. In the oral tradition, it is observed, on whicli the first three
gospels were founded, tlie simple and popular, the concise and sen-
tentious discourses of Jesus, being the most easy of retention, would
alone be propagated, wliile his more profound, subtle and diffuse
discourses would be lost.f But according to tlie above supposition,
tlie fourth evangelist, came as a gleaner after tlie synoptists: now it
is certain tliat all tlie discourses of Jesus having a practical tendency
liad not been preserved by them ; hence, tliat the former has almost
invariably avoided giving any relic of such discourses, can only be

* Bretgchneiuer, Probab. p. 2, 3, 31 ff.   + De Wette Einleit. in das NT. § 103;

THE LIFE OF JESUS.

418

explained Ly his preference for tlie dogmatic and speculative vein:

a preference which must have had both an objective and a subjective
source, tlic necessities of Ins time and circumstances, and tlic Lent
of Ills own mind.  Tills is admitted even by critics who are favour-
able to the authenticity of tlic fourth gospel,* witli tlie reservation,
tliat that preference betrays itself only negatively, by omission, not
positively, by addition.

There is a fin-thcr difference between tlic synoptical gospels and
tlie fourth, as to tlie form of teacliing adopted by Jesus ; in the one,
it is aphoristic and parabolic, in the other, dialectic.t We have seen
that tlic parable is altogether wanting in tlie fourth gospel, and it is
natural to ask why, since Luke, as well as Matthew, lias many ad-
mirable parables peculiar to himself, John lias not been able to make
a rich gleaning, even after tliose two predecessors ? It is true tliat
isolated apothegms and sentences, similar to tlic synoptical ones, are
not entirely absent from tlic fourth gospel: but, on the other hand,
it must be admitted that tlic prevailing aphoristic and parabolic form
of instruction, ascribed to Jesus by the synoptists, is more suited to
tlic character of a popular teacher of Palestine, than the dialectic
form which lie is made to adopt by Jolm.{

But the relation of the discourses of Jesus in tlie gospel of John,
to the evangelist's own style of thinking and writino', is decisive.
Here we find a similarity^ which, as it extends to the discourses
of a third party, namely, tlie Baptist, cannot be explained by sup-
posing tliat tlie disciple had formed his style on tliat of the master,!)
but requires us to admit tliat the evangelist lias lent Ins own style
to the principal characters in his narrative. Tlie latest commenta-
tor on John has not only acknowledged this with regard to the col-
ouring of tlic expression; lie even thinks that in the matter itself
lie can here and there detect the explanatory amplifications of tlie
evangelist, wlio, to use Ills own phrase, has had a hand in tlie com-
position of tlie longer and more difficult discourses.^ But since the
evangelist docs not plainly indicate his additions, what is to assure
us that they are not throughout interwoven with tlie ideas of Jesus,
nay, tliat all tlio discourses which he communicates are not entirely
his own productions ? The style furnishes no guidance, for tills is
every whore tlio same, and is admitted to be the evangelist's own;

neither docs tlie sense, for in it also there is no essential difference
whether tlie evangelist speaks in his own name, or in that of Jesus:

where then is tlie guarantee tliat tlie discourses of Jesus are not, as
the author of tlie Probalailia maintains, free inventions of the fourth
evangelist ?

Lucke adduces some particulars, which on tills supposition would
be in his opinion inexplicable.** First, tlie almost verbal agreement

* Tholuck, nt sup.  ) BntscliiK'ulcr, ut sup.  ^ De Wette, lit sup. '^ 10-'>.  3 Ccnnp.
Schuize, der M'liril'ist. Charukter uinl Werth des Johannes. 180;!.  |i Stronck-dc doutrina
• •<• .• -,. i.,i,.,...,:., ,,^,^-t,^; ,ifi .Tpun miK.-ish-i doctrinani dictioncinclue exactu composita,

DISCOURSES OF JESUS IN THE FOURTH GOSPEL.

419

of Jolm with the synoptists in isolated sayings of Jesus. But aa
tlie fourth evangelist was witliin the pale of the Christian commu-
nity, lie must have had at his command a tradition, from which,
though drawing generally on his own resources, he might occasion-
ally borrow isolated, marked expressions, nearly unmodified. An-
other argument of Lucke is yet more futile.  If, lie says, John liad
really liad tlie inclination and ability to invent discourses for Jesus,
lie would have been more liberal in long discourses; and tlic alter-
nation of brief remarks with prolonged addresses, is not to be ex-
plained on the above supposition.  But this would follow only if
tlie author of tlic fourth gospel appeared to be a tasteless writer,
whose perception did not tell him, tliat to one occasion a short dis-
course was suitable, to another a long one, and that tlie alternation
of diffuse harangues witli concise sentences was adapted to produce
tlie best impression.  Of more weight is tlie observation of Paulus,
that if tlie fourth evangelist liad given tlic rein to his invention in
attributing discourses to Jesus, he would have obtruded more of his
own views, of which lie lias given an abstract in his prologue; whereas
the scrupulousness with wliieli he abstains from putting Ills doctrine
of the Logos into tlic mouth of Jesus, is a proof of tlie faithfulness
with which lie confined himself to the materials presented by his
memory or Ills authorities.* But the doctrine of tlic Logos is sub-
stantially contained in the succeeding discourse of Jesus; and that
tlic form in which it is propounded by tlie evangelist in his preface,
docs not also reappear, is sufficiently explained by tlie consideration,
that lie must have known that form to be altogether foreign to the
teaching of Jesus.

We therefore liold it to be established, tliat tlie discourses of
Jesus in John's gospel are mainly free compositions of tlie evange-
list ; but we have admitted tliat lie lias culled several sayings of
Jesus from an authentic tradition, and hence we do not extend tills
proposition to those passages which are countenanced by parallels
in tlic synoptical gospels.  In these compilations we have an ex-
ample of tlie vicissitudes which bcfal discourses, tliat are preserved
only in tlie memory of a second party.  Severed from their original
connexion, and broken up into smaller and smaller fragments, they
present wlicn reassembled tlic appearance of a mosaic, in which the
connexion of tlic parts is a purely external one, and every transition
an artificial juncture.  Tlie discourses of Jesus in Jolm present just
tlic opposite appearance.  Their gradual transitions, only rendered
occasionally obscure by the mystical depths of i. ailing in which
they lie,-transitions in wliicli one thought develops itself out of
another, and a succeeding proposition is frequently but an explana-
tory amplification of tlie preceding, \-are indicative of a pliable,

* In Ins review of the 2nd Ed. of Lflcke's Commentar., in the Lit. Blatt der allgem.
Kirchenzeitung 1S31, no. 18.   f This peculiarity of the discourses in John cannot be
lietter described than by Erasmus in his Epist. ad Ferdinandum, prefatory to Ins Para-

420                 THE LIFE OF JESUS.

unresisting mass, such as is never presented, to a writer by the
traditional sayings of another, but such as proceeds from the stores
of his own thought, which he moulds according to hia will. For
this reason the contributions of tradition to these stores of thought,
(apart from the sayings which are also found, in the earlier gospels,)
were not so likely to have been particular, independent dicta of
Jesus, as rather certain ideas which formed the basis of many of
his discourses, and which were modified, and developed according to
the tent of a mind of Alexandrian or Greek culture. Such are the
correlative ideas of TTOTTJP and vwc: (father and son), 'j>&<; and anorog
{light and darkness), ^"i) and -Sava-oi; (life and death), avu and
Bdi-di {above and beneath), Gap!; and •nvev^a (flesh and spirit) ; also
some symbolical expressions, as ap-oc; r!]<; <,uf](; {bread of life), vSwfi
i,C>v {water of life). These and a few other ideas, variously com-
bined by an ingenious author, compose the bulk of the discourses
attributed to Jesus by John; a certain uniformity necessarily at-
tending this elemental simplicity.